Exploring the role of conceptual knowledge and representational 
competence in an augmented reality physics environment
Kozlova Zoya
a , *
, Edelsbrunner Peter A.
a
, Warkentin Max
b
, 
Hoyer Christoph
b
, Küchemann Stefan
b
, Kuhn Jochen
b
, Hofer Sarah I.
a
a
Department of Psychology, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit ¨at München, Munich, Germany
b
Chair of Didactics of Physics, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit ¨at München, Munich, Germany
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Augmented reality
Prior knowledge
Individual differences
Physics education
ABSTRACT
Prior knowledge plays a crucial role in learning in STEM education. The potential interplay be -
tween components of the prior knowledge, such as representational competence and conceptual 
understanding, remains remarkably underexplored. Even less is known about how these re -
lationships unfold in augmented reality (AR)-supported learning environments, which offer 
unique affordances, such as visualizing the invisible, that may shape the role of prior knowledge 
in new ways.
Using a sample of N = 203 high school students, we examined how prior knowledge of physics 
concepts and representations influenced subsequent knowledge of both concepts and represen -
tations in AR-supported and traditional learning environments. Learners in the AR condition 
acquired more conceptual knowledge than those in the traditional condition. A cross-lagged path 
analysis revealed a consistent, unidirectional relationship from prior representational competence 
to subsequent conceptual knowledge, when controlling for prior conceptual knowledge for both 
instructional conditions. These results indicate that representational competence is a robust 
predictor of conceptual learning, independently of the learning environment.
What role does previously gained knowledge play in the acquisition of new knowledge across domains? To what extent does this 
relationship depend on the learning environment? These longstanding questions lie at the heart of understanding individual learning 
mechanisms.
Prior research has consistently demonstrated that existing knowledge serves as a crucial foundation for future learning, guiding the 
integration of new information ( Alexander & Murphy, 1999 ; Bittermann et al., 2023 ; Carey, 2000 ). Domain-specific prior knowledge is 
a significant determinant of learning outcomes ( Alexander & Judy, 1988 ; Witherby & Carpenter, 2022 ). This relationship holds across 
different types of knowledge - declarative, procedural, or mixed - as well as across a range of subject domains and educational levels 
( Simonsmeier et al., 2022 ). Simonsmeier et al. (2022) confirmed in a meta-analysis that prior knowledge is strongly correlated with 
posttest performance ( r = 0.53), and this effect was consistent even when controlling for intelligence or study design. Recent work by 
Schneider and Simonsmeier (2025) highlights that it is not just the presence of prior knowledge that matters. In other words, it is the 
characteristics of this knowledge, such as its accuracy, coherence, and relevance to the learning task, that determine whether it fa -
cilitates or hinders learning. However, such findings primarily stem from studies conducted in traditional learning environments, such 
* Corresponding author. Leopoldstr. 13, 80802, München, Germany.
E-mail address: zoya.kozlova@psy.lmu.de (K. Zoya). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers & Education
journal homepag e: www.el sevier.com/loc ate/compe du
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2026.105658
Received 28 July 2025; Received in revised form 13 April 2026; Accepted 1 May 2026  
Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105658 
Available online 14 May 2026 
0360-1315/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/ ). 