What task to offload to GenAI in the writing feedback process? – 
Effects of task-offloading approaches on EFL learners ’ writing 
skill development
Chun Lai
a
, Mengru Pan
a , b , *
, Kai Guo
c
, Yaqiong Cui
d
a
Faculty of Education, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
b
School of Foreign Language, Huainan Normal University, Anhui, China
c
Department of Curriculum and Instruction, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
d
Department of Foreign Languages, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
GenAI
Feedback
EFL writing
Writing skills
Task offloading
ABSTRACT
Generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) brings mixed blessings to learning, and it is important to 
figure out ways to optimize the integration of GenAI that augments human intelligence. This 
study explored different approaches to offloading tasks to GenAI in the writing feedback process 
and the impact on student writing development. Adopting a quasi-experimental design, this study 
compared 101 university English as a foreign language (EFL) students' writing skill development 
under three GenAI task-offloading conditions: (1) GenAI-draft, learner-evaluate, and learner- 
revise; (2) learner-draft, GenAI-evaluate, and learner-revise; and (3) learner-draft, learner-eval -
uate, and learner-revise. ANCOVA analyses revealed that involving GenAI in the feedback process 
led to greater writing gains, and that positioning GenAI as draft writer and learners as feedback 
provider carried the most benefit. The findings draw attention to the nuances in task-offloading 
approaches, and advocate offloading initial production to GenAI and onloading evaluation and 
revision to learners. The study further revealed that learners in this condition exhibited greater 
instances of interactive engagement (learning-oriented interaction in particular) with GenAI, 
performed better in peer review tasks that tested the application of metacognitive knowledge of 
argumentative writing, and reported higher cognitive engagement, deeper metacognition of 
argumentative writing and of AI's limitations, as well as greater writing self-efficacy. These 
psychological processes were influenced by various motivational, cognitive, and metacognitive 
factors. A conceptual model of the psychological processing under this task offloading condition 
and AI's role was proposed based on the research findings.
1. Introduction
Generative artificial intelligence (GenAI) brings mixed blessings for writing feedback. On the one hand, it boosts the customization, 
interactivity, and ubiquity of feedback practices ( Ali et al., 2023 ; Jeon et al., 2023 ). GenAI feedback is recognized for being (1) 
impersonal, reducing emotional stress during the feedback process ( Zou et al., 2025 ); (2) elaborative, enhancing learning opportunities 
( Escalante et al., 2023 ; Lee & Moore, 2024 ); and (3) timely, boosting learner engagement and subsequent learning ( Alsofyani & 
* Corresponding author. :The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam Road, Room 668, Meng Wah Complex, Hong Kong, China.
E-mail address: mengru56@connect.hku.hk (M. Pan). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers & Education
journal homepag e: www.el sevier.com/loc ate/compe du
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2026.105675
Received 11 October 2025; Received in revised form 28 May 2026; Accepted 29 May 2026  
Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
Available online 30 May 2026 
0360-1315/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ). 
techniques for different English genres (i.e., expository, narrative, descriptive, and argumentative) taught by the same instructor. The 
module for the argumentative genre lasted four weeks, during which students received instruction on constructing argument structure, 
formulating logical claims, utilizing evidence and transitions, and addressing counterclaims. All participants were English majors, with 
an average age of 20.39 years (SD = .88). Their English proficiency was of intermediate level (CEFR level B2), as evidenced by their 
scores in the College English Test Band 4 (M = 485.29, SD = 40.58). The participants reported an average of seven months ’ prior 
experience with GenAI tools, and their average frequency of GenAI use was between “ a few times per week ” and “ less than 30 min per 
day ” . Only 25 students (24.8%) reported using GenAI tools on a daily basis. Appendix A summarizes the demographic characteristics of 
participants.
Before conducting this study, we obtained ethical approval from the institutional review board of the authors ’ university and 
secured informed consent from all participating students.
3.2. Research design
The study employed a quasi-experimental design, assigning the three intact classes into three intervention conditions: Class 1 – the 
GenAI as Feedback Receiver condition (GenAI-draft, learner-feedback, learner-revise); Class 2 – the GenAI as Feedback Provider 
condition (learner-draft, GenAI-feedback, learner-revise); Class 3 - the No GenAI Involvement condition (learner-draft, learner- 
feedback, learner-revise). Participants completed four out-of-class writing tasks using a structured worksheet with three phases – 
drafting, evaluation, and revision. Fig. 1 illustrates the specific procedure across the three conditions.
3.3. Research procedures
Fig. 2 shows the research procedure. The study lasted seven weeks. In Week 1 (one week prior to the argumentative writing 
module), all participants completed a pre-test on argumentative writing, and a pre-intervention questionnaire on prior GenAI expe -
rience and writing self-efficacy in class, followed by a training that familiarized the participants with both the argumentative writing 
assessment rubric and the platform that they would use during the intervention. This rubric, adapted from Nakkaew and 
Fig. 2. Research procedures.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
5 
Adunyarittigun (2019) , assesses six key aspects of argumentative writing: introduction, reason and evidence, counterargument and 
refutation, conclusion, organization and transitions, and language use (see Appendix B ). Each criterion in the rubric was explained to 
the participants. To enhance active engagement with the rubric, an evaluation worksheet, containing a checklist for each criterion and 
the justification for evaluation (see Appendix C ), was developed for students in Conditions 1 and 3. Participants were also introduced 
to the Notion platform, a collaborative workspace that creates a structured environment for individual writing tasks and allows the 
integration of external tools ( Osawa, 2023 ), chosen to facilitate students ’ workflow and streamline data collection (see Supplementary 
Materials for the Notion page for each condition). Participants in Conditions 1 and 2 received additional training on using Kimi, a free 
GenAI tool developed by Moonshot AI, chosen for its validated abilities to generate coherent, contextually relevant text while 
providing high-quality writing feedback ( Jiang, 2025 ; Yao et al., 2025 ).
From Week 2 to Week 5 (during the argumentative writing module), participants completed four out-of-class argumentative 
writing tasks on the Notion platform, one task each week. The writing tasks were adapted from the GRE's ‘Analyze an Issue ’ task (see 
https://www.ets.org/gre/revised_general/prepare/analytical_writing/issue/ ), carefully selected to elicit opinions on educational is -
sues from different perspectives: parent/employer (praise positive actions and ignore negative ones), government (free education for 
all), society (modern luxuries on character development), and university (interest-driven vs. job-oriented college majors) (see 
Appendix D for the writing prompts). To encourage students to take the writing practice tasks seriously, these writing assignments 
were incorporated into the course's participation score, with no teacher feedback nor in-class discussions on the writing products. 
Participants in Condition 3 were instructed not to use any GenAI tools for writing assistance, and the instructor periodically checked 
with the students and conducted qualitative reviews of their writing samples to identify any inconsistencies in writing style that might 
suggest undeclared GenAI assistance.
After the completion of the argumentative writing module, in Week 6, a post-test on argumentative writing skills and a post- 
intervention questionnaire on writing self-efficacy were administered. In addition, all participants completed a peer review task.
In Week 7, individual semi-structured interviews were conducted with five students from each condition.
3.4. Data sources
3.4.1. Pre-and post-test on argumentative writing skills
Participants' argumentative writing performance was assessed via a 40-min in-class pre-test and post-test, with no access to GenAI 
or any reference materials. The tasks were also selected from the GRE's ‘Analyze an Issue ’ assessment, deliberately focusing on edu -
cation topics from the learner perspective (pre-test: long-term goals vs. instant fame in life; post-test: active questioning vs. passive 
acceptance of teaching) to enhance the prompt comparability in genre, familiarity, difficulty, and rhetorical demands, and also 
differentiate them from the prompts in the practice sessions (see Appendix D ). Two experienced writing instructors vetted the prompts 
to ensure the equivalence in cognitive complexity, linguistic difficulty, and rhetorical requirements. GRE's ‘Analyze an Issue ” 
assessment is a measure of analytical writing skills, which engages students to develop and support a position on the issue featured in 
the prompt, requesting the formulation and expression of logically connected ideas supported with applicable examples. The construct 
validity of this measure has been substantiated in previous research ( Breyer et al., 2014 ).
3.4.2. Pre- and post-questionnaire on writing self-efficacy
We assessed students ’ writing self-efficacy using seven researcher-developed, six-point Likert scale (1 = strongly disagree to 6 =
strongly agree) items on the ideation and convention aspects of argumentative writing ( Bruning et al., 2013 ). The items were reviewed 
by a writing research expert and pilot-tested with another group of undergraduate students to ensure clarity and reliability. The items 
(see Appendix E ) demonstrated strong internal consistency in both pre- ( α = .88) and post-questionnaire ( α = .91).
3.4.3. Peer review task
Given that metacognitive knowledge of writing, being a conceptual element of feedback literacy ( Teng & Ma, 2024 ), is positively 
associated with the quality of peer review ( Bui & Kong, 2019 ), and that performance metrics are advocated as concrete ways to capture 
metacognitive control ( Zhang et al., 2024 ), we assessed students ’ peer-review performance, as a behavioral proxy of metacognitive 
knowledge of argumentative writing, on Week 6, where they were instructed, in 25 min, to offer feedback on a peer essay on the same 
topic written by a student from a previous cohort (see Appendix F ).
3.4.4. GenAI conversation logs
We collected conversation logs with Kimi during the four writing tasks from students in Conditions 1 and 2.
3.4.5. Semi-structured interviews
Fifteen students were invited to participate in individual semi-structured interviews in Chinese, their native language, each lasting 
approximately 30 min. To capture a diverse range of perspectives, participants were selected using maximum variation sampling 
within each condition to reflect varied writing performance. The interviews elicited students ’ overall perceptions of their experience, 
and perceived impact, if any, on writing and self-efficacy and reasons thereof. Students from Conditions 1 and 2 were also invited to 
share views on the role of GenAI in the process (see Appendix G for the protocol). The interview protocol was pilot-tested with three 
students prior to the main interviews, leading to minor language refinements to enhance the clarity.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
6 
3.5. Data analysis
To answer RQ1 on writing skill development, we evaluated the students ’ pre- and post-writing performance using the same adapted 
six-aspect assessment rubric ( Nakkaew & Adunyarittigun, 2019 ) employed during the intervention (see Appendix B ). Each essay was 
scored on a scale from 1 to 4 on each aspect, resulting in a maximum score of 24 for each essay. To ensure scoring reliability, the second 
and third authors studied the rubric together and then independently coded 25% of the essays, with satisfactory inter-rater reliability: 
introduction ( κ = .85), reason and evidence ( κ = .92), organization and transitions ( κ = .88), counterclaim and rebuttal ( κ = .91), 
conclusion ( κ = .87), and language use ( κ = .90). All discrepancies were resolved through discussion. The remaining essays were then 
scored independently by the second author. To further validate scoring consistency, a random subset of these independently scored 
essays underwent a secondary review by the third author, with any remaining disagreements resolved through joint arbitration. 
ANCOVA analysis was then conducted on the post-test score, using pre-test scores as the covariate.
RQ2 examined the three psychological processes. To examine cognitive engagement, we measured both the qualitative dimension – 
nature of cognitive processes attended to via interview responses, and quantitative dimension – interactive engagement with GenAI via 
GenAI conversation logs ( Alam & Mohanty, 2024 ). GenAI conversation logs provided the behavioral indicators of interactive 
engagement, and interview responses tapped further into learner voices on the nature of cognitive processes. We coded GenAI con -
versation logs on the total number of GenAI prompts, indexing attempts of interactive engagement ( Chi and Wylie, 2014 ), and the 
number of learning-oriented prompts, indexing the depth of interactive engagement ( Oliveira et al., 2025 ). Learning-oriented prompts 
were operationalized as prompts that seek guidance and advice from GenAI for learning purposes (see Appendix H for the coding 
scheme). Following the same reliability validation procedure, the prompts were coded by the second and third authors, and a reli -
ability score of .93 was obtained for the coding, with all discrepancies resolved through discussion. The frequencies were compared 
between Conditions 1 and 2 using Mann-Whitney U test due to the violation of the normality assumption. Thematic analysis was 
conducted on the interview responses to shed light on the depth of cognitive processing attended to and the level of cognitive 
engagement (see Appendix J for the coding scheme, which was derived inductively from the data).
To examine metacognition, we assessed the participants' metacognitive knowledge of argumentative writing and of AI ( Brown, 
1987 ; Teng, 2025a ) through both comparing students' peer review performance to examine learners' ability to apply metacognitive 
knowledge of argumentative writing and analyzing interview responses to shed light on whether and how the experience impacted 
both metacognition of argumentative writing and metacognition of AI as well as the influencing factors. The quality of students' peer 
feedback was assessed using three key features from Kerman et al. ’ s ( 2024 ) evaluation framework that target metacognitive elements: 
(1) identification (the identification and localization of issues in the essay), (2) justification (elaborations and justifications of the 
identified issues), and (3) constructive (the inclusion of recommendations and action plans for further improvements). See Appendix I
for the coding scheme. Each feedback comment (a full sentence) received a score for each feature, resulting in a maximum score of 6 for 
each comment. The scores were then aggregated to provide an overall feedback quality score for each student. The coding was done by 
the second and third authors, following the same reliability validation procedure as above. The inter-rater reliability scores for the 
feedback quality coding were as follows: identification ( κ = .85), justification ( κ = .82), and constructiveness ( κ = .88). MANOVA 
analysis and subsequent ANOVA analyses were conducted on the three dimensions. Thematic analysis on the interview responses shed 
further light on metacognitive knowledge of argumentative writing and metacognition of AI interaction (see Appendix J for the coding 
scheme).
We examined writing self-efficacy by comparing survey responses for self-efficacy gains and analyzing interview responses to shed 
light on how the experience impacted or failed to impact self-efficacy as well as the influencing factors. Composite scores were 
calculated for self-efficacy based on pre- and post-questionnaire responses. ANCOVA analysis was conducted on the post-intervention 
writing self-efficacy scores, controlling for pre-intervention scores.
Thematic analysis was conducted on the interview data through an evolving process of coding and recoding ( Saldana, 2021 ) to 
generate codes on the psychological processes in terms of the nature of cognitive engagement ( Alam & Mohanty, 2024 ), metacognition 
of argumentative writing and of AI interaction ( Brown, 1987 ; Teng, 2025a ), and writing efficacy, as well as codes on the motivational, 
cognitive, and metacognitive barriers to learning in the process ( Fiorella, 2023 ). Based on the interview responses and relevant 
literature, we conducted structural coding to generate data segments of interest (e.g., segments on AI feedback). Each data segment 
was then coded using in-vivo or summary codes. In the second-cycle analysis, we first assessed the utility of the codes, and recoded, 
categorized or discarded codes through cross-participant comparison. We then conducted pattern coding to group codes with similar 
meaning under analytical categories. For instance, codes like “ lengthy responses ” , “ rather tactful and indirect ” , and “ looking very 
similar ” were grouped into the analytic category “ limitations of AI responses ” . Referring to relevant literature, provisional analytic 
categories were further categorized into theoretical themes such as “ metacognition of AI feedback ” . Theoretical categories that 
co-occurred were coded into provisional thematic categories and compared across cases to reveal potential relationships (e.g., 
“ metacognition of AI feedback formed motivational barriers to learning ” ). The interview coding was done by the first and second 
authors. They first coded one third of the data together to finalize the coding scheme, and then coded the rest independently. 
Inter-rater reliability, calculated using Cohen's kappa, was .88, with all discrepancies resolved through discussion. See Appendix J for 
the coding framework.
4. Findings
ANOVA analyses of pre-test scores (F = .18, p > .05), prior GenAI experience (F = .25, p = .78), and frequency of GenAI use (F =
.83, p = .44) all showed no significant differences, indicating comparable initial writing abilities and AI experience across the three 
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
7 
groups.
4.1. Writing skill development across the three groups
ANCOVA analysis revealed a significant difference across the three conditions on post-writing test performance: F (2, 97) = 26.63, 
p < .001, partial η
2 
= .35. Post hoc comparisons using Bonferroni correction revealed that both Condition 1 (M = 18.21, SD = 2.21) and 
Condition 2 (M = 16.30, SD = 1.70) performed significantly better than Condition 3 (M = 15.15, p = 1.79), indicating that incor -
porating GenAI into the feedback process did lead to greater learning (see Table 1 ).
Moreover, Condition 1 (M = 18.21, SD = 2.21) performed significantly better than Condition 2 (M = 16.30, SD = 1.70), indicating 
that offloading the drafting task to GenAI for learners to evaluate and revise led to greater learning than offloading the feedback task to 
GenAI.
4.2. Psychological processes across the three groups
4.2.1. Differences in cognitive engagement
Mann-Whitney U tests on both the total number of GenAI prompts (U = 195; p < .001) and of learning-oriented prompts (U =
398.5, p < .05) were statistically significant ( Table 2 ). Students in Condition 1 not only interacted significantly more with GenAI but 
also inputted more prompts for clarification, guidance and advice from GenAI (Median = 20.50; IQR = 22 and Median = 10.50; IQR =
16 respectively) than their counterparts in Condition 2 (Median = 9.00; IQR = 8 and Median = 8.00; IQR = 8 respectively).
The interview responses further revealed that the three groups manifested different levels of cognitive engagement with the 
assessment rubric and AI output. Participants from the GenAI as Feedback Receiver group (anonymized as P01-P05) reported inter -
acting with AI-generated model text with a learning attitude, as P03 remarked: “ My first reaction was to acquire and curate materials 
for writing. They perceived AI essays of high writing quality, which enhanced their willingness to engage in-depth with the texts (e.g., 
“ AI-generated essays were at a higher level than mine, and I was more willing to study ” – P04). Perceiving AI essays as “ free of 
grammatical errors, ” they reported being able to pay more attention to aspects like “ argumentation techniques ” (P02), “ sentence 
structure variation ” (P04), and “ style of argumentation ” (P03). They further commented that revising these essays pushed them to 
study the texts carefully (P02) and engage “ thoroughly ” and read in greater detail with a critical eye (P03). Evaluating AI essays in 
reference to the assessment rubric boosted greater reflexivity towards the weaker aspects in their own writing (e.g., “ When assessing 
the points, you would think of your previous essays – what needs attention and what needs to be improved ” – P04). Their cognitive 
engagement was further reinforced by their metacognitive positioning of GenAI as a learning guide (e.g., “ guide me on how to write a 
claim or organize arguments based on my idea ” – P02; “ It provides me with guidance. I can learn from it. ” – P04; “ Anything I am not 
sure about, and it will explain for me. ” – P05), and a learning partner ( “ It is a learning partner who is at a higher level than me. ” – P03). 
These learning-oriented positionings of AI made them engage deeply with AI output: All but one reported prompting AI to evaluate its 
generated essay in reference to each criterion of the rubric, with the aim to “ engage AI to explain whether and how its essay achieved 
each criterion" and they themselves “ judge the rationale provided ” (P02). P01 attributed this interaction style to her prior knowledge: 
“ I know what a hook is. So I did not ask it to explain. But instead, I asked it to evaluate whether its essay contained a hook to see 
whether I agree with its explanation. ” They reported further interaction with AI (e.g., “ challenge AI to elaborate ” – P01; “ question it 
iteratively ” – P03) to seek elaborations on unfamiliar concepts in the rubric, discuss potential evidence to support a claim, and ask for 
more sophisticated sentence structures. They further reported deliberate learning engagement with AI output ( “ I would remember and 
use the vocabularies that frequently appeared in the texts ” – P02).
In contrast, participants from the GenAI as Feedback Provider condition (anonymized as P06-P10) largely reported prompting 
GenAI to directly revise the essay for them, despite being instructed to revise the essays on their own. Some recounted rephrasing 
sophisticated language that did not reflect their level to avoid being spotted as plagiarism (P09). They attributed this performance- 
oriented engagement with AI to cognitive barriers. For instance, P08 recounted lacking the language to make revisions on her own: 
“ Limited language proficiency could not support me to make the revisions despite knowing what needed to be revised. ” Similarly, P10 
reported “ asking AI to directly revise the essay for [him], ” and, when prompted why, he answered: “ I don't know how to revise. ” Yet, 
although also asking AI to generate revision samples, P07 took a learning orientation: “ I asked it to provide examples that met the 
criteria so that I could refer to when expanding my essay. ” She further reported engaging with the part of AI feedback that sounded 
persuasive by “ seeking relevant information on Baidu [a popular internet browser in China]. ” This learning-oriented engagement was 
Table 1 
Differences in writing skill development.
Pre-writing score 
Mean (SD)
Post-writing score 
Mean (SD)
Pairwise comparison
Condition 1: 
GenAI as Feedback Receiver (n = 34)
14.09 (1.66) 18.21 (2.21) 1 > 2 *** 
1 > 3 *** 
2 > 3 *Condition 2: 
GenAI as Feedback Provider (n = 33)
14.15 (1.60) 16.30 (1.70)
Condition 3: 
No GenAI Involvement (n = 34)
13.91 (1.80) 15.15 (1.79)
Note. *** p < .001; * p < .05.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
8 
shaped by her metacognitive positioning of AI as a “ strategic advisor ” who “ broadens perspectives ” and provides suggestions and 
samples for her judgement, unlike the others in this group who tended to view AI as a proxy tool (e.g., “ edit my language ” – P06; “ point 
out my weak points and improve them for me ” – P10). Thus, cognitive barriers interplayed with metacognitive positioning of AI to 
shape this group's cognitive engagement with the assessment rubric and AI output.
All participants in the No GenAI Involvement group (anonymized as P11-P15) also reported that engaging with the assessment 
rubric for self-evaluation heightened their self-reflection. But they remarked lacking specific guidance on each criterion (e.g., “ The 
rubric only provided a template without explicit instructions on how to realize each criterion ” – P12). Consequently, they reported not 
being able to engage with some criteria in depth due to the lack of “ detailed guidance ” : P13 expressed the difficulty of “ judging 
whether a certain aspect needs further improvement ” ; and P14 felt that the rubric “ only provided him with a direction, ” and his ability 
to make revision was constrained by his “ existing knowledge and vocabulary size ” .
4.2.2. Differences in metacognition
One-way MANOVA analysis revealed a significant difference in the quality of peer feedback across the three conditions (Wilks' Λ =
.34, F (2,98) = 13.46, p < .001, partial η
2 
= .42), with a significant group effect in all three dimensions: problem identification (F =
24.15, p < .001; partial η
2 
= .33), problem justification (F = 17.40, p < .001; partial η
2 
= .26), and constructive advice (F = 23.70, p <
.001; partial η
2 
= .33). The findings suggest that participants across the three conditions varied in their abilities to apply metacognitive 
knowledge of argumentative writing to assess peer essays. The interview responses further revealed differences in the depth of 
metacognitive knowledge. All the interview participants, regardless of conditions, reported increased declarative metacognitive 
knowledge about key elements of argumentative essay writing as a result of the assessment rubric, which, to them, provided “ detailed ” 
and “ logical ” organizational structure that served as a “ guiding framework ” (P06) for subsequent writing and provided them with 
“ clues on where to start ” (P12; P15) and ways to “ make the essay more comprehensive and logical ” (P02). Yet, participants across the 
conditions reported varying depths of procedural and conditional metacognitive knowledge. The No GenAI Involvement group re -
ported metacognitive knowledge at the principle level (e.g., “ use hooks that draw attention ” – P11) with a level of uncertainty, using 
terms like “ somewhat unclear ” (P11) and “ fuzzy ” (P13), in specific techniques. Consequently, they regarded the acquired meta -
cognitive knowledge as a “ reminder ” of things they “ didn't notice before ” (P11) and a “ general direction ” (P15). In contrast, partic -
ipants in the two GenAI conditions reported greater details in metacognitive knowledge. The GenAI as Feedback Provider group 
highlighted how the feedback from GenAI drew their attention to key characteristics like diversity – diverse viewpoints and varying 
evidence – and the importance of cohesive and complex sentence structures. Participants in the GenAI as Feedback Receiver group 
reported acquiring specific techniques from AI essays, such as transition words (P05) and “ discourses of rebuttal ” (P02), as well as 
techniques of varying sentence structures and writing attractive introductions and conclusions (P01, P02, P05). They felt AI essays 
provided concrete examples (P05), and their sophistication offered greater learning possibilities “ not constrained by one's own draft ” 
(P01). They further noted AI's limitations in writing when evaluating AI essays – such as “ mechanically piecing together claims without 
depth ” (P03) and “ lacking supporting details ” (P02) – which helped them derive a “ deeper ” understanding of key characteristics of a 
good essay.
Participants also reported various barriers that hindered learning. The barriers frequently brought up by participants from the No 
GenAI Involvement group concerned values of the assessment rubric. They used words like “ simple, ” “ abstract, ” and “ rigid ” to describe 
the rubric and complained about lacking specific guidance on individual elements (e.g., “ Each criterion is too general and abstract ” – 
P14). Consequently, P13 interpreted the rubric as “ a writing formula ” and compared the evaluation-revision experience to “ a cloze 
test ” . As a result, P12 perceived the whole evaluation-revision experience as providing “ great help on structure but less on techniques 
and thinking ” . Participants in the GenAI as Feedback Provider group also reported motivational barriers that hindered learning, yet 
pertaining to the limitations of AI feedback, such as “ lengthy responses ” (P08), “ repetitive ” (P06), and “ speaking in a rather tactful or 
indirect manner, skipping some problems in my essays, which made me unaware of these problems for a long time ” (P09). These 
perceived limitations reduced their cognitive engagement with the AI output ( “ Its revision made my essay very sophisticated, which 
obviously was beyond my level. I asked it to get rid of that part ” – P08), limiting its contribution to the development of metacognitive 
knowledge. Participants in the GenAI as Feedback Receiver group listed the homogeneity in AI output (e.g., “ its essays often followed 
the same pattern ” – P05) as limiting the depth of metacognitive knowledge they could acquire through studying the model texts. 
Evaluating AI essays made P03 discover problems with their organization and language use, which made her question their value: “ It 
might not be that useful in helping develop deeper understanding. ” These motivational barriers further interacted with metacognitive 
Table 2 
Differences in student interaction with GenAI.
Median (IQR) Mann-Whitney U Test
Total amount of student prompts to GenAI Condition 1: 
GenAI as Feedback Receiver (n = 34)
20.50 (22) 195.00***
Condition 2: 
GenAI as Feedback Provider (n = 33)
9.00 (8)
Learning-oriented prompts Condition 1: 
GenAI as Feedback Receiver (n = 34)
10.50 (16) 398.50*
Condition 2: 
GenAI as Feedback Provider (n = 33)
8.00 (8)
Note. *** p < .01; * p < .05.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
9 
barriers, such as metacognitive attention ( “ I paid more attention to structure. When it indicated my tone was not strong enough, not 
formal, I wouldn't pay much attention ” – P07), and strategic knowledge of AI prompts ( “ I can't get AI to understand my intention ” – 
P02; “ It couldn't produce the version I wanted, maybe because my prompt was not clear ” – P08). Cognitive barriers, like background 
knowledge, also were salient. Limited language proficiency made P04 take a more “ appreciative, ” rather than critical, stance when 
analyzing AI model texts. For P11, as the assessment rubric “ only raised issues without providing solutions, ” limited language makes 
her resort to “ fixed vocabularies or sentences ” to express a formal tone or “ seeking and regurgitating online templates ” to create 
attractive hooks, which she felt made her essay rather “ rigid ” . Understanding of the assessment rubric was also listed as an influencing 
factor. Most participants from the No GenAI Involvement group reported feeling “ bewildered ” and disoriented at initial exposures to 
the rubric due to unfamiliarity with some key terms, and the high cognitive load made some “ give up paying attention to all the details 
in the framework ” (P15). On the other hand, perceived prior knowledge in elements in the rubric made P14 perceive the rubric as 
rather “ simple ” with limited potential for learning and made P10 feel that there was “ no need to probe deeper with GenAI ” . Moreover, 
participants' cognitive abilities to appropriate AI feedback also constrained learning, as P08 pointed out that GenAI feedback contained 
too much information that “ did not directly address what [she] wanted, ” which made her at a loss in how to proceed with revision 
( “ After reading the suggestions, I still did not know how to revise ” ). This incapability made P10 choose to ask GenAI to revise for him, 
which lowered his cognitive engagement: “ I didn't know how to revise. I used GenAI to revise many aspects, and I did not think much in 
the process ” .
Post hoc comparisons using Bonferroni correction ( Table 3 ) further revealed that the two AI groups outperformed the No GenAI 
Involvement group in providing problem justification (Condition 1: M = 2.82, SD = .25; Condition 2: M = 1.91, SD = .25; Condition 3: 
M = .77, SD = .25), and in offering constructive revision suggestions (Condition 1: M = 4.97, SD = .35; Condition 2: M = 4.18, SD =
.36; Condition 3: M = 1.68, SD = .35). Yet, findings on problem identification were mixed, where Condition 2 (M = 1.85, SD = .35) did 
not differ from Condition 3 (M = 1.18, SD = .35). The findings indicate that integrating GenAI into the feedback process contributed to 
writing skill development through boosting the abilities to give explanations and provide constructive advice on problems identified in 
essays, whereas its effect on the abilities of problem identification depended on how GenAI was integrated into the feedback process. 
Moreover, Condition 1 outperformed Condition 2 in problem identification (M = 4.41, SD = .35 vs M = 1.18, SD = .35) and in problem 
justification (M = 2.82, SD = .25 vs M = 1.91, SD = .25).
The interview responses further revealed that the observed edge in problem justification and constructive advice among the two AI 
groups might be due to interactivity with GenAI. Participants from the GenAI as Feedback Receiver group recounted that being able to 
interact with GenAI helped them understand unfamiliar concepts in the assessment rubric (P04; P05). P02 further shared that “ asking 
GenAI about its thinking process made [her] understand how to write rebuttal ” . Similarly, participants from the GenAI as Feedback 
Provider group shared that GenAI enabled them to access “ explanations on confusing concepts ” (P06) and “ seek examples on how to 
address the weak points identified by GenAI ” (P07). Thus, interaction with GenAI gave these two groups exposure to justification and 
revision advice. Yet, the GenAI as Feedback Receiver group had higher instances of learning-oriented interaction with AI, which 
accounts for their greater performance in problem justification.
The mixed findings on problem identification resulted from the interplay of engagement in evaluation (or lack thereof) with GenAI 
support (or lack thereof). Using the assessment rubric to evaluate essays made the participants “ notice aspects [they] didn't pay 
attention to before ” (P04, P11). Yet, not having external support from AI, the majority of the participants from the No GenAI 
Involvement condition found themself unable to identify specific problems: “ I'm not clear about some points in the rubric framework, 
which made me unable to have a clear idea on the problems in my essay ” (P13); and “ I could identify problems on big issues, such as 
the lack of a rebuttal or evidence to support a claim. But for the other aspects, I couldn't identify my problems ” (P14). This was 
exacerbated by the lack of opportunities to interact with GenAI for elaboration or guidance, which made them unable to see the need 
Table 3 
Differences in essay evaluation ability.
Mean (SD) Pairwise comparison
Problem identification score Condition 1: 
GenAI as Feedback Receiver (n = 34)
4.41 (.35) 1 > 2*** 
1 > 3*** 
2 < 3Condition 2: 
GenAI as Feedback Provider (n = 33)
1.18 (.35)
Condition 3: 
No GenAI Involvement (n = 34)
1.85 (.35)
Problem justification score Condition 1: 
GenAI as Feedback Receiver (n = 34)
2.82 (.25) 1 > 2* 
1 > 3*** 
2 > 3***Condition 2: 
GenAI as Feedback Provider (n = 33)
1.91 (.25)
Condition 3: 
No GenAI Involvement (n = 34)
.77 (.25)
Constructive advice score Condition 1: 
GenAI as Feedback Receiver (n = 34)
4.97 (.35) 1 > 2 
1 > 3*** 
2 > 3***Condition 2: 
GenAI as Feedback Provider (n = 33)
4.18 (.36)
Condition 3: 
No GenAI Involvement (n = 34)
1.68 (.35)
Note . *** p < .001; * p < .05.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
10 
for revision. For instance, P11 commented: “ I need someone to tell me whether and why a certain aspect of my essay needs further 
improvement ” . Similarly, P15 expressed the wish for “ a comprehensive analysis [of the rubric] so that [he] wouldn't feel lost in why 
and how to improve ” . For the GenAI as Feedback Provider group, as the evaluation work was offloaded to AI, who helped “ identify 
points [they] could not spot on [their] own ” (P07), they didn't get a chance to directly practice problem identification, which explained 
why they performed the worst in this category.
4.2.3. Differences in writing self-efficacy
ANCOVA analysis on writing self-efficacy ( Table 4 ) revealed a significant difference across the three conditions (F (2, 97) = 5.40, p 
< .01, partial η
2 
= .10), with significantly higher gains for Condition 1 (M = 4.74, SD = .55) and no significant differences between 
Condition 2 (M = 4.42, SD = .53) and Condition 3 (M = 4.45, SD = .78).
Although all three groups reported boosted writing self-efficacy, participants from the GenAI as Feedback Receiver condition 
attributed it to the acquired metacognitive knowledge of argumentative writing and of AI. For some, seeing different writing tech -
niques in GenAI-generated model texts (P01 and P03) and retrieving elaborative examples on specific criteria from GenAI (P04) 
equipped them with metacognitive understanding that could guide future writing. For others, “ being able to improve ” GenAI- 
generated essays made P01 and P02 believe in their abilities to write good essays. Perceiving that AI essays, though sounded 
elegant, read like “ piecing data together, ” P02 believed that “ [she] may be able to write more lively essays, more humane essays ” .
Participants from the GenAI as Feedback Provider condition reported rather divided views. On the one hand, the acquired met -
acognitive knowledge of argumentative writing “ eased the writing task ” and could “ be transferred to new writing tasks ” (P06), 
consequently making them “ feel more confident in writing a good argumentative essay ” (P09). Receiving “ positive remarks in GenAI 
feedback ” also boosted self-efficacy (P07). On the other hand, performance-oriented engagement with AI for revision made them 
uncertain about their progress, giving them “ a false sense of confidence ” (P09; P10). P09 elaborated: “ AI helped me make a better 
revision, but I might have relied on it too much that my teacher wouldn't be able to see my real level when reading my revised essays ” .
Similar mixed feelings were expressed by participants in the No GenAI Involvement group. Acquiring organizational structure from 
the rubric gave them a sense of certainty (e.g., “ have a better idea on where and how to start, no longer feeling at a lost ” – P15; “ a 
guarantee on meeting basic standards ” – P13) and a sense of achievement (e.g., “ seeing more and more boxes on the self-checklist 
being ticked, I felt motivated and satisfied ” – P11). They consequently felt “ freer ” (P12 and P15) and “ bolder ” (P13) in writing. But 
at the same time, they also expressed a sense of uncertainty about the metacognitive knowledge (e.g., “ I feel my hook is attractive, but 
may not be perceived so by others ” – P11; “ I'm not sure whether I would be able to apply the framework during exam when the rubric is 
no longer available ” – P13). P11 also pointed out that because the assessment rubric was fixed across the four writing tasks, she spotted 
fewer and fewer problems, which might have given her a false sense of self-efficacy as “ there might still be many problems which 
simply were not covered in the rubric ” . This false sense of self-efficacy reduced P12's cognitive engagement with the rubric, where she 
reported “ skimming through ” and “ paying attention to only a few elements ” in later rounds.
5. Discussion
Driven by the observed decoupling of performance gains and writing development and the concerns over potential cognitive at -
rophy in AI-assisted writing ( Fan et al., 2025 ; Henderson et al., 2025 ; Wang & Wang, 2025 ), this study explored ways to optimize 
human-AI interaction that supports writing development from the angle of task offloading. It revealed that: (1) offloading either the 
drafting or the evaluation task to GenAI led to greater writing development than no offloading; and (2) offloading the drafting task to 
GenAI was most effective. Joining others ( Darvishi et al., 2024 ; Li & Tekwa, 2025 ), the study underscores the significance of task 
design in boosting the learning potentials of human-AI interaction. Existing discourses on task design emphasize scaffolding – grad -
ually shifting externalized support from GenAI towards internal monitoring ( Darvishi et al., 2024 ), and timing – involving GenAI only 
after students have completed an initial draft independently ( Kosmyna et al., 2025 ; Li & Tekwa, 2025 ). This study drew attention to yet 
another factor – the nature of task offloading, advocating offloading the generation tasks (e.g., drafting essays) to AI and onloading the 
metacognitive tasks (e.g., evaluation) to learners as a way to counter potential cognitive atrophy in AI-assisted writing. This task 
offloading condition was found to yield the greatest generative learning potential, adding to the nascent evidence on the develop -
mental advantages of critiquing AI-generated texts ( Hong et al., 2025 ; Li, R., 2025 ).
More importantly, this study revealed psychological mechanisms behind the greater learning potential of this task offloading 
condition – deeper cognitive engagement, greater metacognitive awareness of argumentative writing and AI, and boosted writing self- 
Table 4 
Differences in the change of writing self-efficacy.
Pre-writing efficacy 
Mean (SD)
Post-writing efficacy 
Mean (SD)
Pairwise comparison
Condition 1: 
GenAI as Feedback Receiver (n = 34)
3.61 (.59) 4.74 (.55) 1 > 2 * 
1 > 3 * 
3 > 2Condition 2: 
GenAI as Feedback Provider (n = 33)
3.68 (.72) 4.42 (.53)
Condition 3: 
No GenAI Involvement (n = 34)
3.79 (.53) 4.45 (.78)
Note. * p < .05.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
11 
efficacy. Deeper cognitive engagement derived from the high-quality activation of the visualization mode conceptualized in the 
Generative Sense Making framework ( Fiorella, 2023 ). The high-quality activation manifested in deeper cognitive engagement with the 
visualization tool (the assessment rubric) due to heightened interaction with GenAI, learning-oriented interaction in particular, around 
the rubric; and in additional concrete, enriched, and elaborated visualization resources (AI-generated model texts) accessible in this 
condition, which enabled attention to higher-order aspects of writing during essay evaluation and revision. In contrast, the visuali -
zation mode was rather limiting for the other two conditions due to either lacking opportunity or incentive to interact with GenAI or 
being stuck dealing with lower-order issues, such as grammar and word choice, in their own drafts. Offloading the generation task to 
GenAI while onloading the metacognitive task to learners lowers the intrinsic cognitive load of writing (i.e., the mental efforts in 
lexical retrieval, grammatical encoding, and idea formulation) but maintains the germane cognitive load (i.e., the mental efforts 
dedicated to constructing and automating schemas), which, according to Cognitive Load Theory ( Sweller, 2011 ), may induce thorough 
and deep engagement with the learning task without feeling overwhelmed (e.g., Evans et al., 2024 ). Engaging in the metacognitive 
task of providing feedback activates in-depth engagement with the content and comparison with alternatives, elevating reflexivity 
( Nicol, 2012 ; Zong et al., 2021 ).
High-quality activation of the visualization mode contributes to the activation of the explanation mode, i.e., the formulation of 
underlying principles ( Fiorella, 2023 ). In this study, the elevated cognitive engagement with the assessment rubric was found to induce 
deeper metacognitive knowledge of argumentative essay that was transferred to the peer review task. This finding makes sense, since 
engagement with rubrics and model-text analysis are associated with the construction of internal schema and deeper metacognitive 
awareness of writing ( Zeng et al., 2023 ; Zhang et al., 2024 ). Evaluating and revising AI essays led to metacognitive awareness of AI's 
limitations in writing, which further augmented this group's metacognitive knowledge of argumentative essay. This finding aligns with 
previous studies showing that critiquing and analyzing AI-generated compositions may enhance metalinguistic awareness of writing 
and metacognitive understanding of genre structure ( Chambers & Owen, 2024 ; Li, R., 2025 ). This depth of metacognitive knowledge 
was neither salient among the GenAI as Feedback Provider group whose task only involved the enacting mode (essay revision), nor 
achievable among the No GenAI Involvement group who had no access to AI, leading to only fuzzy, surface-level metacognitive 
knowledge that served as a reminder or a general direction at most.
The acquired metacognitive knowledge on both argumentative essay and AI's limitations in writing further fueled this group's 
writing self-efficacy, in contrast to the false sense of self-efficacy among the other two groups as a result of perceived reliance on AI or 
perceived ambiguity in metacognitive knowledge. Previous research has suggested the link between AI literacy, critical evaluation of 
AI technologies in particular, and writing self-efficacy (e.g., Pan & Zhang, 2025 ). This study further revealed that being able to 
pinpoint and amend problems of the more capable peer that they regarded GenAI to be activated a strong sense of affirmation, freeing 
the participants from the social pressure and obstacles often associated with peer feedback ( Martin & Sippel, 2021 ; Zhou et al., 2020 ).
Taken together, the findings suggest a framework of psychological mechanisms underlying the learning potential of offloading 
drafting to AI and onloading evaluation and revision to learners ( Fig. 3 ). The framework underscores three roles of GenAI in the 
process: (1) as an interaction medium that enhances the level of cognitive engagement and deepens metacognitive knowledge of 
argumentative essay; (2) as a draft provider that channels cognitive attention to higher-order aspects and raises metacognitive 
awareness of AI's limitations in writing; and (3) as a feedback receiver that provides a source of affirmation for self-efficacy. This 
process is shaped by an array of barriers identified through interview data in this study, including motivational barriers – perceived 
Fig. 3. Psychological mechanisms behind the generative learning potentials of GenAI as Feedback Receiver task design and AI's roles.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
12 
limitations of the assessment rubric and of GenAI output; metacognitive barriers – metacognitive attention, metacognitive positioning 
of AI, and strategic knowledge of AI interaction; and cognitive barriers – language proficiency, prior knowledge of the rubric, and 
capacities to appropriate AI output.
The findings contribute to the scholarly discussions on cognitive offloading (the use of external tools to reduce internal cognitive 
demands) in human-AI interaction. Jose et al. (2025) differentiated assistive offloading (i.e., offloading that assists cognition) from 
substitutive offloading (i.e., offloading that replaces cognition through auto-suggestion), and argued that the latter may induce shallow 
engagement, illusion of competence, reduced agency, and encoding and retrieval decline. Findings from this study support the 
conceptualized psychological differences induced by the level of cognitive offloading. Offloading drafting to AI and onloading eval -
uation to the learner positions GenAI as a tool to assist the productive struggles in evaluation, which are associated with greater 
engagement with the content, greater internalization of learning, and more reflexivity towards one's ideas ( Kapur, 2016 ; Pak, 2024 ). 
Deeper cognitive engagement and critical reasoning, and greater metacognitive knowledge and reflexivity are conditions essential to 
realizing the benefits of GenAI in writing development ( Zaheer et al., 2025 ). Adding to existing discourse, this study further revealed 
that substitutive offloading of the generation task of drafting, when supplemented with critiquing and revision, was less detrimental to 
learning than substitutive offloading of the metacognitive task of evaluation. The finding hence cautions that offloading essay eval -
uation to AI for automatic feedback, a common practice in AI-assisted writing, might be suboptimal for learning. Thus, cognitive 
offloading in human-AI interaction needs to consider not only the level of offloading but also the nature of tasks being offloaded.
6. Implications
The study has the following theoretical implications: First, the study adds nuances to cognitive offloading in human-AI interaction. 
Though cognitive offloading reduces cognitive load and facilitates engagement and performance, existing literature cautions that 
excessive or premature offloading may harm learning ( Hong et al., 2025 ; Jose et al., 2025 ; Kosmyna et al., 2025 ), underscoring the 
level and timing of offloading. This study draws attention to yet another dimension of cognitive offloading – the type of task being 
offloaded, advocating future research to examine the effects of task offloading in different learning contexts and among different 
student populations. Second, the study conceptualizes three roles of GenAI in amplifying learning potentials of generative learning 
tasks that activate visualization and enacting modes ( Fiorella, 2023 ), illustrating how it might empower cognitive, metacognitive, and 
affective processes. Future research may examine these roles separately to understand the amplification potential of each. Moreover, 
the extent to which each psychological mechanism contributes to writing development and how these mechanisms might interplay 
remain unknown and deserve further research. Future research may also examine how the working mechanisms might differ when 
learners provide feedback to GenAI versus to peers.
The study has the following practical implications: First, the study advises caution regarding the widespread use of GenAI as 
feedback provider, and urges exploration into alternative task-offloading approaches, such as using GenAI as writing text providers 
( Grobe, 2023 ; Li, 2025 ), especially when the pedagogical purpose is to develop metacognitive awareness of writing. Second, the study 
draws attention to an array of motivation, cognitive, and metacognitive barriers that may undermine the learning potential of 
GenAI-assisted writing. Teachers hence need to create conditions in pedagogical design and learner interventions to help learners 
overcome these barriers. In addition to enhancing prior knowledge, reducing the cognitive load in the task design, or providing explicit 
instruction, scaffolded practice, and independent practice to support learners’ internal sense-making processes as recommended by 
Fiorella (2023) , this study suggests the following instructional practices: (1) to design personally meaningful writing tasks that 
incentivize learning-oriented interaction with GenAI; (2) to arrange collaborative work around GenAI feedback to enhance revision 
skills; and (3) to implement learner training that helps learners build collaborative relationships with GenAI, position AI as a learning 
guide and learning partner, and engage in proactive and reflective use of GenAI feedback in writing ( Yang et al., 2024 ; Zaheer et al., 
2025 ; Zhan et al., 2025 ).
7. Conclusions, limitations, and future research
Adopting a quasi-experimental design, this study examined the effects of task offloading approaches on writing development. It 
found that involving GenAI in the feedback loop facilitated learning and that offloading drafting to GenAI and onloading evaluation 
and revision to learners carried the most benefit. The study further revealed higher cognitive engagement, deeper metacognition about 
argumentative writing and AI, and boosted self-efficacy under this task offloading condition. The findings advocate greater attention to 
task offloading in human-AI interaction.
This study has several limitations that call for future research. First, this study was conducted in the argumentative writing context. 
As students’ interaction with GenAI and abilities to reap the benefits may vary for different learning tasks and different types of writing 
genres ( Liu et al., 2024 ; Vaccaro et al., 2024 ), the observed edge of positioning GenAI as draft producers for learners to evaluate and 
revise needs to be investigated in different learning and writing contexts.
Second, several sample-related limitations should be acknowledged. The small sample size of 101 participants across three 
experimental conditions may have limited statistical power and increased the sensitivity of the results to sampling variability across 
groups. Although we controlled for prior writing ability and self-efficacy, the groups may vary in other influencing factors such as task 
motivation and AI prompt literacy. Future studies should employ a larger participant pool to verify the robustness of these findings. 
Furthermore, the participants were sampled from a single university, predominantly female, and of intermediate-high English pro -
ficiency. The demographic and institutional homogeneity may constrain the external validity of the results. Learners of different 
language proficiency levels and gender benefit differently from feedback providing ( Cao et al., 2019 ; Lundstrom & Baker, 2009 ; Zeng 
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
13 
& Ravindran, 2024 ), and language and prior knowledge are important cognitive barriers that affect learning potential. Future research 
may replicate this study with diverse populations to further validate the preliminary observations from this study.
Third, the research tools are limiting. The static assessment rubrics used in the intervention might have a diminishing impact on 
learning over time, especially among the No GenAI Involvement condition, as revealed in interview responses. Future studies may 
repeat the study with dynamic rubrics. Using a single GenAI tool, Kimi, with its unique algorithmic biases or functionalities and low AI 
explainability (i.e., invisible chain of thought) at the time of the study might have constrained the power of AI and shaped AI inter -
action behaviors. The findings hence need to be validated using more updated AI tools and allowing coordinated use of multiple AI 
tools. This study used peer review performance as a behavioral proxy of metacognitive knowledge of argumentative writing. Although 
peer review indexes domain knowledge – the groundwork for metacognitive knowledge – and could reasonably serve as a window into 
metacognitive knowledge, it is a partial indicator at most and does not directly tap into metacognitive awareness of the argumentative 
writing process. Future research may complement peer review measures with additional methods (e.g., self-report inventories and 
think-alouds) on metacognitive reasoning to obtain a more complete picture.
Fourth, the research design limits the findings. While the seven-week intervention, which included four writing tasks, contained 
sufficient intensity to observe immediate effects, the short duration could not speak to sustained writing skill development, meta -
cognitive development, and self-efficacy, as writing development, particularly at the argumentative level, requires extended practice 
across diverse genres and contexts. Thus, the findings are preliminary at most. We recommended further research to employ a longer 
intervention design to shed light on the evolving impact of task offloading conditions on writing skill development and psychological 
processes across different types of writing tasks, genres, and contexts. Also, for the No GenAI Involvement condition, although we 
implemented measures to prevent unauthorized GenAI usage, the prevalence of GenAI tools made absolute control impossible. Future 
investigations may consider conducting the interventions in controlled environments, such as in class, to effectively monitor and 
control for external GenAI usage. This study, although based on a mixture of behavioral and self-report data sources, relied primarily 
on retrospective measures to shed light on psychological processes, which might not have fully captured these processes and could not 
shed nuanced insights into cognitive processing and AI interaction. Future studies should consider incorporating process-tracing 
measures to capture these processes in real time and log moment-by-moment AI interaction to conduct detailed analysis into psy -
chological processes and interaction dynamics that underpin the learning gains. Moreover, due to the sample constraints, the study was 
only able to create three conditions to compare the effects of cognitive offloading on drafting and on evaluation. To shed a 
comprehensive light on cognitive offloading in writing feedback loop, future studies may add a fourth condition – cognitive offloading 
on revising (learner draft, AI revise, learner evaluate the revision). Including this condition in the design would enable us to derive 
nuanced insights into the respective effects of offloading the two generation tasks in writing (draft vs. revision).
Finally, it should be noted that the influencing factors (e.g., motivational barriers, metacognitive barriers, and cognitive barriers) in 
Fig. 3 were derived from the interview responses. Future studies are therefore needed to test their potential associations with the task 
offloading effect through measuring them and including them in statistical analyses. Furthermore, the study focused on understanding 
the aggregated effects of task offloading conditions. However, individual differences in AI literacy, prompt-engineering skills, and 
prior experience with GenAI tools might have influenced the outcomes and could serve as potential confounding variables. Future 
research should examine how these individual differences moderate the effects of task offloading approaches on writing development, 
and discern differential learning trajectories or identify specific subgroups that might benefit more or less from distinct GenAI task 
loading approaches.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Chun Lai: Writing – review & editing, Writing – original draft, Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, 
Methodology, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Mengru Pan: Writing – review & editing, 
Writing – original draft, Software, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Kai Guo: Writing – review & editing, 
Visualization, Validation, Formal analysis, Data curation. Yaqiong Cui: Writing – review & editing, Conceptualization.
Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work the authors used ChatGPT in order to improve readability and language. After using this tool, 
the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and take full responsibility for the content of the publication.
Funding details
This study was funded by the Standing Committee on Language Education and Research of Hong Kong (Grant number: 1047-2050- 
8080-9020-00052) awarded to the first author.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
14 
Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2026.105675 .
Appendix A. Demographic information of participants
Class Age Gender English proficiency (CET-4 scores) The frequency of GenAI use 
a
Class 1 (N = 34) M = 20.18 Male = 3; Female = 31 M = 478.03; SD = 36.61 3.06
Class 2 (N = 33) M = 20.55 Male = 9; Female = 24 M = 495.63; SD = 36.62 3.12
Class 3 (N = 34) M = 20.44 Male = 3; Female = 31 M = 482.5; SD = 46.69 3.32
Note . a. 1 = a few times per year; 2 = a few times per month; 3 = a few times per week; 4 = less than 30 min per day; 5 = less than 1 h per day; 6 = 1 h 
to 3 h per day; 7 = more than 3 h per day.
Appendix B. The argumentative writing evaluation rubric
Aspects 4 points - Excellent 3 points - Good 2 points - Fair 1 point - Poor
Introduction 
Original hook engages the 
reader's curiosity; background 
information is relevant and 
clearly develops into thesis; 
thesis/claim is strong, clearly 
stated.
Engaging hook captures the 
reader's curiosity; background 
information is relevant and 
leads to a strong, clear thesis.
Hook is somehow 
engaging; background 
information is relevant 
and leads to a clear thesis.
Hook is weak; background 
information is vague or not 
clearly connected to the 
thesis; thesis is unclear or 
weak.
No hook; background 
information is irrelevant 
or missing; thesis is 
absent or poorly stated.
Reason & Evidence 
Two or more main points are 
well developed with supporting 
details, and all the evidence is 
relevant and clearly connected 
to the thesis.
Two or more main points are 
well developed with relevant 
supporting details; all evidence 
is clearly connected to the 
thesis.
Main points are developed 
with supporting details; 
evidence is mostly 
relevant and connected to 
the thesis.
Main points are 
underdeveloped or lack 
supporting details; evidence 
is somewhat relevant but 
lacks clear connection to the 
thesis.
Main points are missing 
or unclear; evidence is 
irrelevant or absent.
Counterargument & Refutation 
Counterclaim is effectively 
addressed; strong rebuttal is 
supported by compelling 
evidence and effectively refutes 
counterclaim.
Counterclaim is effectively 
addressed; strong rebuttal is 
supported by compelling 
evidence that thoroughly 
refutes the counterclaim.
Counterclaim is 
addressed; rebuttal is 
present and supported by 
some evidence but may 
not fully refute the 
counterclaim.
Counterclaim is weakly 
addressed; rebuttal is present 
but lacks sufficient evidence 
or clarity.
Counterclaim is not 
addressed or absent; 
rebuttal is missing or 
ineffective.
Conclusion 
Conclusion summarizes the 
main topics without repeating 
previous sentences; writer's 
opinions and suggestions for 
change are logical and well 
thought out.
Conclusion effectively 
summarizes main topics 
without repetition; writer's 
opinions and suggestions are 
logical and well thought out.
Conclusion summarizes 
main topics; opinions and 
suggestions are logical but 
may lack depth.
Conclusion is vague or 
repeats previous content; 
opinions and suggestions are 
unclear or poorly developed.
Conclusion is missing or 
does not summarize main 
topics; no logical opinions 
or suggestions provided.
Organization & Transition 
Ideas are coherently organized 
into separate body paragraphs; 
topic sentences are complete; 
logical, compelling progression 
of ideas in essay; effective, 
mature, graceful transitions 
exist throughout the essay.
Ideas are coherently organized 
into separate body paragraphs; 
topic sentences are complete; 
logical progression and 
effective transitions enhance 
the essay.
Ideas are mostly 
organized; topic sentences 
are present; progression is 
clear with generally 
effective transitions.
Organization is unclear; 
topic sentences are 
incomplete; progression of 
ideas is weak; transitions are 
lacking.
Ideas are chaotic; topic 
sentences are absent; no 
logical progression or 
transitions present.
Language Use 
Tone is formal; no personal 
pronouns; no slang; strong 
words appropriate to stance are 
used; no repetition of major 
words; punctuation, 
capitalization, spelling and 
usage are correct.
Tone is formal with no 
personal pronouns or slang; 
strong, varied word choice 
enhances the argument; 
conventions (punctuation, 
capitalization, spelling) are 
correct.
Tone is mostly formal; 
word choice is 
appropriate; few errors in 
conventions that do not 
interfere with 
understanding.
Tone is somewhat formal; 
word choice is basic or 
repetitive; several errors in 
conventions that may hinder 
understanding.
Tone is informal; 
inappropriate word 
choice; frequent errors in 
conventions that 
significantly hinder 
understanding.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
15 
Appendix C. The evaluation worksheet for Conditions 1 and 3
Please evaluate the essay against the checklist (put a ✔ on 
the items that are in place)
Areas for 
improvement
Introduction Original hook engages the reader's curiosity ロ 1. Is there a hook in the introduction paragraph? 
ロ 2. Is the hook successful in arousing your interest in 
reading?
​
Thesis/claim is strong, clearly stated, and supported by 
relevant background information
ロ 1. Did the author provide the background information 
that leads to the thesis? 
ロ 2. Is the thesis/claim clearly stated? 
ロ 3. Does the thesis state a significant and compelling 
position?
​
Organization & 
Transition
Two or more main points are well developed with 
relevant supporting details clearly connected to the 
thesis
ロ 1. Is each main point well supported by evidence? 
ロ 2. Is the evidence relevant to each main point? 
ロ 3. Did the author use different types of evidence to 
support the main points?
​
Ideas are sequenced logically and coherently organized 
into separate body paragraphs with clear topic 
sentences
ロ 1. Does each paragraph center around a main idea/ 
point? 
ロ 2. Does each paragraph start with a compelling topic 
sentence for each idea/point? 
ロ 3. Is the sequence of the main points logical and shows 
a clear progression in deepening the argumentation? 
ロ 4. Are the paragraph(s) well connected with one 
another with transition words?
​
Counterclaim & 
Rebuttal
Strong rebuttal is supported by compelling evidence 
and effectively refutes counter claim
ロ 1. Is there a rebuttal to counter the main thesis/claim? 
ロ 2. Are there relevant evidences to support the rebuttal 
ロ 3. Is the rebuttal effective in refuting the main thesis/ 
claim?
​
Conclusion A strong conclusion with summary of the main points 
and writer's opinions and suggestions for change
ロ 1. Did the conclusion effectively summarize the main 
topics and thesis without repeating previous sentences? 
ロ 2. Did the conclusion go beyond restating the thesis 
and includes a call to action?
​
Language Use Language is formal, with strong words and no errors ロ 1. Are the tones formal and consistent without personal 
pronouns and slang? 
ロ 2. Are words appropriate and strong to the stance and 
not too repetitive? 
ロ 3. Are sentences strong and expressive with varied 
structure? 
ロ 4. Is the essay free of punctuation, capitalization, 
spelling and grammar errors?
​
Appendix D. The writing prompts used in the pre- and post-tests and during the intervention
Task prompts
Pre-test “Young people should be encouraged to pursue long-term, realistic goals rather than seek immediate fame and recognition.” Discuss the extent to 
which you agree or disagree with this statement and provide reasons for the position you take. In developing and supporting your position, you 
should include relevant evidence. Write 300-500 words.
Intervention ‘The best way to teach – whether as an educator, employer, or parent – is to praise positive actions and ignore negative ones.’ Discuss the extent to 
which you agree or disagree with this statement and provide reasons for the position you take. In developing and supporting your position, you 
should include relevant evidence. Write 300-500 words.
‘Governments should offer college and university education free of charge to all students.’ Discuss the extent to which you agree or disagree with 
this statement and provide reasons for the position you take. In developing and supporting your position, you should include relevant evidence. 
Write 300-500 words.
‘The luxuries and conveniences of contemporary life prevent people from developing into truly strong and independent individuals.’ Discuss the 
extent to which you agree or disagree with this statement and provide reasons for the position you take. In developing and supporting your 
position, you should include relevant evidence. Write 300-500 words.
‘College students should be encouraged to pursue subjects that interest them rather than the courses that seem most likely to lead to jobs.’ Discuss 
the extent to which you agree or disagree with this statement and provide reasons for the position you take. In developing and supporting your 
position, you should include relevant evidence. Write 300-500 words.
Post-test ‘Students should always question what they are taught instead of accepting it passively.’ Discuss the extent to which you agree or disagree with this 
statement and provide reasons for the position you take. In developing and supporting your position, you should include relevant evidence. Write 
300-500 words.
Appendix EWriting self-efficacy questionnaire
1. I can present well-rounded perspectives.
2. I can support my claims with effective evidence.
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
16 
3. I can present logical argumentation.
4. I can clearly express my viewpoints.
5. I can use precise language to make effective arguments.
6. I can use persuasive language to articulate my arguments.
7. I can effectively use language to convey ideas with clarity and logic.
Appendix FPeer essay used in the peer review task
In the education system, many students are encouraged to listen to their superiors and rarely question what they say. However, it is 
my belief that students should sometimes question what they are taught, especially if they feel like their teacher is incorrect.
To begin, if students just accept every concept they are taught throughout school, they will lose the ability to think freely for 
themselves. For example, in my Literature class, my teacher encouraged us to speak up and give our opinions when discussing a piece 
of literature. Each novel or poem we read, we always analyzed and discussed them in class. If my teacher had just told us about his 
opinions on what the meaning of each novel was, and our class never gave our input, we would lose valuable thinking abilities. By 
actively imputing our opinions, we gradually learned how to become more independent thinkers.
However, there are some cases when students should not question what they are taught. A science class is an example of a situation 
where students should limit what they question. Many concepts in science, such as the law of gravity, is static and will never change. 
Students need to learn when it is an appropriate time to challenge what they are taught and when to accept what they are taught.
On the basis of the points mentioned above, I neither agree nor disagree with the statement that students should always question 
what they are taught instead of accepting it passively.
Appendix G. Interview protocol for students in the three conditions
Questions for students in 
Condition 1
• What's your overall perception of the process of evaluating and revising the GenAI-generated essay?
• Did you find this process helpful in enhancing your argumentative writing? If yes, what aspects and how? And on what aspects 
you didn't find it helpful and why not?
• How did you find this arrangement in shaping your writing self-efficacy and writing development? In what aspects was this 
arrangement helpful? In what aspects was it not helpful?
• How did you perceive the role of GenAI in writing?
Questions for students in 
Condition 2
• What's your overall perception of the process of seeking feedback from GenAI and revising your essay based on the feedback?
• Did you find this process helpful in enhancing your argumentative writing? If yes, what aspects and how? And on what aspects 
you didn't find it helpful and why not?
• How did you find this arrangement in shaping your writing self-efficacy and writing development? In what aspects was this 
arrangement helpful? In what aspects was it not helpful?
• How did you perceive the role of GenAI in writing?
Questions for students in 
Condition 3
• What's your overall perception of the process of evaluating and revising your essay based on the self-checklist?
• Did you find this process helpful in enhancing your argumentative writing? If yes, what aspects and how? And on what aspects 
you didn't find it helpful and why not?
• How did you find this arrangement in shaping your writing self-efficacy and writing development? In what aspects was this 
arrangement helpful? In what aspects was it not helpful?
Appendix H. Coding framework for analyzing conversation logs
Category Description Examples Condition 1 (N) Condition 2 (N)
Task 
1
Task 
2
Task 
3
Task 
4
Task 
1
Task 
2
Task 
3
Task 
4
Prompt amount The total number of prompts a 
student sends to GenAI.
/ 217 250 227 212 63 81 80 83
Learning-oriented 
prompts
Prompts that ask GenAI for 
suggestions, guidance, feedback, 
explanations, information, or 
elaborations that create 
opportunities for learning.
What is a hook in an 
introduction 
paragraph? Please give 
me an example of a 
hook?
160 162 129 105 61 78 68 67
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
17 
Appendix I. Coding framework for analyzing quality of peer feedback
Feature of 
feedback
Points Label Description
Identification 0 Poor - not mentioned The comment did not include explicit identification of problem
1 Average - mentioned but not localized The comment included identification of problem without localization of 
identified problem
2 Good - mentioned and localized The comment included explicit and localized identification of problem
Justification 0 Poor - not mentioned The comment did not include elaborations and justifications of identified 
problem
1 Average - mentioned elaborated, but not justified The comment included elaborations but not justifications of identified 
problem
2 Good - mentioned elaborated and justified The comment included elaborations and justifications of identified problem
Constructive 0 Poor - not mentioned The comment did not include any recommendations or action plans for 
further improvements.
1 Average - only recommendation is mentioned The comment included recommendations but not action plans for further 
improvements.
2 Good - both recommendation and action plan are 
mentioned
The comment included recommendations and action plans for further 
improvements.
Appendix J. Coding scheme of the psychological processes and barriers
Themes Categories Sub-categories Descriptions Condition 1 Condition 2 Condition 3
Counts 
(N)
Representative 
quotes
Counts 
(N)
Representative 
quotes
Count 
(N)
Representative 
quotes
Cognitive engagement Depth of 
cognitive 
processes 
attended to
Attention to 
and deep 
engagement 
with AI output
Carefully read 
and process AI- 
generated text or 
feedback in detail 
and/or with a 
critical lens
5 I took a more 
critical lens when 
reading its essays. 
You would 
carefully look for 
its mistakes.
2 I read the part AI 
revised and 
carefully savored 
it, and did feel its 
words were 
excellent. 
Judge whether 
agreed with the 
rationale AI 
provided.
/ /
Reflexivity 
towards one's 
essay
Engage in self- 
reflection of one's 
essay critically to 
achieve a better 
understanding of 
one's strength and 
weakness
5 The rubric makes 
you see what is 
missing and 
engage in self- 
reflection. 
When assessing the 
points, you would 
think of your 
previous essays.
0 / 5 Look at the form 
and start to inspect 
whether I touched 
all the points. 
I notice aspects I 
didn't pay 
attention to before.
Shallow/ 
Uncertain 
engagement 
with the 
assessment 
rubric
Engage with the 
assessment rubric 
with uncertainty, 
lacking clarity
0 / 0 / 5 When assessing 
my essay, I feel I'm 
‘wrestling’ with the 
assessment rubric. 
I felt I wrote well, 
but then it did not 
look that well 
either. 
I hope it would 
give me more 
detailed 
instructions.
Level of 
cognitive 
engagement
Learning- 
oriented 
engagement AI 
output
Engage with AI- 
generated text or 
feedback to learn
4 I study AI's essays 
to curate materials 
for writing. 
I would remember 
and use the 
vocabularies 
frequently 
appeared in its 
texts.
1 I study some new 
perspectives from 
AI feedback.
/ /
Learning- 
oriented 
Converse with AI 
to seek for 
5 I would ask AI 
about its thinking 
2 I often seek 
examples on how 
/ /
(continued on next page)
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
18 
(continued )
Themes Categories Sub-categories Descriptions Condition 1 Condition 2 Condition 3
Counts 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes 
Counts 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes 
Count 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes
conversation 
with AI
guidance, advice, 
examples, etc. 
that would 
facilitate learning 
or engage 
iteratively with 
AI
process. 
Referring to the 
rubric, I would 
evaluate AI's 
essays and ask it 
questions on 
different aspects.
to address the weak 
points identified by 
GenAI. 
I would question it 
iteratively.
Performance- 
oriented 
conversation 
with AI
Converse with AI 
to ask AI to 
complete the task 
for them
2 I ask AI to revise 
the essay based on 
my feedback.
5 I ask AI to directly 
revise the essay for 
me. 
I ask AI to edit my 
language.
/ /
Metacognition Metacognitive 
knowledge of 
argumentative 
writing
Awareness of 
rudimentary 
aspects of 
metacognitive 
knowledge
Awareness of the 
basic declarative 
knowledge of 
factors that 
influence one's 
writing 
performance (e. 
g., the key 
elements; the 
organizational 
structure)
5 Argumentation 
flow is very clear.
5 I sometimes would 
only write the 
claim without 
evidences or only 
use one sentence to 
talk about the 
evidences. It 
reminds me to 
include a list of 
evidences.
5 Using hooks that 
draw my 
attention.
Awareness of 
higher-order 
aspects of 
metacognitive 
knowledge
Awareness of the 
procedural 
(knowledge of 
how to execute 
specific skills) 
and conditional 
(knowledge of the 
conditions to 
apply various 
cognitive actions) 
aspects of writing
5 While revising, I 
would think about 
what style of 
argumentative 
essay I want. It 
forced me to think 
deeper about 
argumentative 
writing.
3 It showed me 
different ways to 
support my claims.
1 The rubric 
reminded me to 
notice what I 
didn't notice 
before.
Perceived 
depth of 
metacognitive 
knowledge
Negative 
evaluative 
judgement of the 
depth and 
transferability 
one's 
metacognitive 
knowledge
0 / 3 AI helped me make 
a better revision, 
but I might have 
relied on it too 
much that my 
teacher wouldn't be 
able to see my real 
level when reading 
my revised essays.
5 I feel the hook is 
attractive, but may 
not be perceived so 
by others.
Positive/ 
affirmative 
evaluative 
judgement about 
transferring 
procedural/ 
conditional 
metacognitive 
knowledge
4 I would remember 
how it varies 
sentence structures 
as well as the 
vocabularies it 
frequently uses 
and apply them in 
my next writing.
2 It helped us to think 
from different 
perspectives, 
enhancing critical 
thinking.
1 The rubric 
provides clues on 
where to start 
when I write my 
own essay.
Positive/ 
affirmative 
evaluative 
judgement about 
applying 
declarative/ 
rudimentary 
metacognitive 
knowledge
5 The rubric 
provides ways to 
make the essay 
more 
comprehensive 
and logical.
5 That 
organizational 
framework made 
me write faster.
5 It gives a general 
direction for 
writing.
​ Metacognition 
of AI 
interaction
Metacognitive 
awareness of 
the limitations 
of AI
Awareness of the 
limitations of the 
feedback/advice 
from AI
1 Its essays often 
followed the same 
pattern
5 It provided lengthy 
responses with too 
much information.
/ /
(continued on next page)
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
19 
(continued )
Themes Categories Sub-categories Descriptions Condition 1 Condition 2 Condition 3
Counts 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes 
Counts 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes 
Count 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes
Awareness of the 
limitations of 
conversing with 
AI
3 It couldn't make 
revisions based on 
my feedback, 
which made me 
frustrated, feeling 
that it couldn't get 
my intention.
4 It couldn't produce 
the version I 
wanted.
/ /
Awareness of the 
weaknesses in AI- 
generated essays
5 It generated very 
similar templates, 
repeating a list of 
frequently-used 
words. 
It reads like 
piecing data 
together.
0 / / /
Metacognitive 
awareness of 
the strength of 
AI
Awareness of the 
strength of AI 
interaction and 
output
5 Its essays are quite 
elegant. 
The words it used 
were indeed 
excellent.
5 It could explain 
any concepts I'm 
not sure about.
/ /
Metacognitive 
positioning of 
AI
Regarding AI as a 
teacher/tutor or a 
learning partner 
during the 
process to support 
learning
5 It's a learning 
partner who is at a 
higher level than 
me.
1 A strategic advisor. 
It helps me broaden 
perspectives.
/ /
Regarding AI as 
an assistant to 
provide direct 
help on writing or 
revision during 
the process to 
support 
performance
0 / 4 It plays more of an 
assistant role. After 
I complete an 
essay, I ask it to 
point out 
weaknesses and 
ask it to revise. 
I am dominant, it 
assists. When I 
need assistance, I 
ask it to provide 
solutions.
/ /
Self-efficacy Positive self-efficacy Perception of 
positive impact 
on their writing 
efficacy
5 I may be able to 
write more lively 
essays, more 
humane, if I write 
seriously.
3 I can write more 
logical, engaging, 
and persuasive 
essays.
2 Seeing more and 
more boxes on the 
self-checklist being 
ticked in 
subsequent 
rounds, I felt 
motivated and 
satisfied.
Negative self-efficacy Perception of no 
or negative 
impact on their 
writing efficacy
0 / 2 It helped me 
complete the 
writing, which did 
not reflect my 
ability.
3 I'm not sure 
whether I would be 
able to apply the 
framework during 
exam when the 
rubric is no longer 
available.
Barrier Motivational barriers Perceived limited 
value of the 
rubric and/or AI 
output/ 
conversation for 
learning
3 It might not be that 
useful in helping 
me develop deeper 
understanding.
4 I feel some 
feedback from AI is 
not very useful.
5 I feel the rubric 
only raised issues 
without providing 
solutions.
Metacognitive barriers Perceived 
hindrance of one's 
metacognitive 
attention, 
strategic 
knowledge of 
interacting with 
AI or learning 
3 I can't get AI to 
understand my 
intention.
4 I paid more 
attention to 
structure. When it 
indicated my tone 
was not strong 
enough, not 
formal, I wouldn't 
pay much 
3 Each criterion is 
too general and 
abstract.
(continued on next page)
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
20 
( continued )
Themes Categories Sub-categories Descriptions Condition 1 Condition 2 Condition 3
Counts 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes 
Counts 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes 
Count 
(N) 
Representative 
quotes
habits in 
performing the 
task
attention. 
It couldn't produce 
the version I 
wanted, maybe 
because my prompt 
was not clear.
Cognitive barrier Perceived lack of 
prior knowledge 
or language 
proficiency or 
capacity of using 
the rubric and AI 
output to perform 
the task
2 I know what a 
hook is.
3 After reading the 
suggestions, I still 
did not know how 
to revise.
5 Sometimes, I feel 
bewildered. 
My vocabulary is 
very limited.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
References
Alam, A., & Mohanty, A. (2024). Framework of self-regulated cognitive engagement (FSRCE) for sustainable pedagogy: A model that integrates SRL and cognitive 
engagement for holistic development of students. Cogent Education, 11 (1), Article 2363157. https://doi.org/10.1080/2331186x.2024.2363157
Alghazo, S., Rababah, G., El-Dakhs, D. A. S., & Mustafa, A. (2025). Engagement strategies in human-written and AI-generated academic essays: A corpus-based study. 
Ampersand , Article 100237. https://doi-org.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/10.1016/j.amper.2025.100237 .
Ali, F., Choy, D., Divaharan, S., Tay, H. Y., & Chen, W. (2023). Supporting self-directed learning and self-assessment using TeacherGAIA, a generative AI chatbot 
application: Learning approaches and prompt engineering. Learning: Research and Practice, 9 (2), 135 – 147. https://doi.org/10.1080/23735082.2023.2258886
Alsofyani, A. H., & Barzanji, A. M. (2025). The effects of ChatGPT-generated feedback on Saudi EFL learners' writing skills and perception at the tertiary level: A 
mixed-methods study. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 63 (2), 431 – 463. https://doi.org/10.1177/07356331241307297
Breyer, F. J., Attali, Y., Williamson, D. M., Ridolfi-McCulla, L., Ramineni, C., Duchnowski, M., & Harris, A. (2014). A study of the use of the e-rater ® scoring engine for 
the analytical writing measure of the GRE ® revised general test. ETS Research Report Series, 2014 (2), 1 – 66. https://doi.org/10.1002/ets2.12022
Brown, A. L. (1987). Metacognition, executive control, self-regulation, and other more mysterious mechanisms. In F. Weinert, & R. Kluwe (Eds.), Metacognition, 
motivation and understanding (pp. 65 – 116). Erlbaum . 
Bruning, R., Dempsey, M., Kauffman, D. F., McKim, C., & Zumbrunn, S. (2013). Examining dimensions of self-efficacy for writing. Journal of Educational Psychology, 
105 (1), 25. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0029692
Bui, G., & Kong, A. (2019). Metacognitive instruction for peer review interaction in L2 writing. Journal of Writing Research, 11 (2), 357 – 392. https://doi.org/10.17239/ 
jowr-2019.11.02.05
Cao, Z., Yu, S., & Huang, J. (2019). A qualitative inquiry into undergraduates' learning from giving and receiving peer feedback in L2 writing: Insights from a case 
study. Studies In Educational Evaluation, 63 , 102 – 112. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2019.08.001
Chambers, L., & Owen, W. J. (2024). The efficacy of GenAI tools in postsecondary education. Brock Education Journal, 33 (3), 57 – 74. https://doi.org/10.26522/ 
brocked.v33i3.1178
Chatterji, A., Cunningham, T., Deming, D. J., Hitzig, Z., Ong, C., Shan, C. Y., & Wadman, K. (2025). How people use ChatGPT (no. w34255) . National Bureau of 
Economic Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w34255
Chi, M. T., & Wylie, R. (2014). The ICAP framework: Linking cognitive engagement to active learning outcomes. Educational Psychologist, 49 (4), 219 – 243. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/00461520.2014.965823
Darvishi, A., Khosravi, H., Sadiq, S., Ga ˇsevi ´c, D., & Siemens, G. (2024). Impact of AI assistance on student agency. Computers & Education, 210 , 104967. https://doi. 
org/10.1016/j.compedu.2023.104967 .
Escalante, J., Pack, A., & Barrett, A. (2023). AI-generated feedback on writing: Insights into efficacy and ENL student preference. International Journal of Educational 
Technology in Higher Education, 20 (1), 57. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-023-00425-2
Evans, P., Vansteenkiste, M., Parker, P., Kingsford-Smith, A., & Zhou, S. (2024). Cognitive load theory and its relationships with motivation: A self-determination 
theory perspective. Educational Psychology Review, 36 (1), 7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-023-09841-2
Fan, Y., Tang, L., Le, H., Shen, K., Tan, S., Zhao, Y., … Ga ˇsevi ´c, D. (2025). Beware of metacognitive laziness: Effects of generative artificial intelligence on learning 
motivation, processes, and performance. British Journal of Educational Technology, 56 (2), 489 – 530. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13544
Fiorella, L. (2023). Making sense of generative learning. Educational Psychology Review, 35 (2), 50. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-023-09769-7
Fiorella, L., & Mayer, R. E. (2015). Learning as a generative activity . Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/cbo9781107707085
Flavell, J. H. (1979). Metacognition and cognitive monitoring: A new area of cognitive – developmental inquiry. American Psychologist, 34 (10), 906 – 911. https://doi. 
org/10.1037/0003-066x.34.10.906
Gao, Y., & Liu, H. (2021). The benefits of providing peer feedback in English writing and its influencing factors. Technology Enhanced Foreign Language Education, 6 , 
87 – 93. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2023.101252
Gao, Y., Schunn, C. D. D., & Yu, Q. (2019). The alignment of written peer feedback with draft problems and its impact on revision in peer assessment. Assessment & 
Evaluation in Higher Education, 44 (2), 294 – 308. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2018.1499075
Grobe, C. (2023). Why i'm not scared of ChatGPT . The Chronicle of Higher Education . 
Guo, S., Latif, E., Zhou, Y., Huang, X., & Zhai, X. (2024). Using generative AI and multi-agents to provide automatic feedback. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.07407 .
Heil, J., Ifenthaler, D., Cooper, M., Mascia, M. L., Conti, R., & Penna, M. P. (2025). Students' perceived impact of GenAI tools on learning and assessment in higher 
education: The role of individual AI competence. Smart Learning Environments, 12 (1), 37. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-025-00395-0
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
21 
Henderson, M., Bearman, M., Chung, J., Fawns, T., Buckingham Shum, S., Matthews, K. E., & de Mello Heredia, J. (2025). Comparing generative AI and teacher 
feedback: Student perceptions of usefulness and trustworthiness. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education , 1 – 16. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
02602938.2025.2502582
Herbold, S., Hautli-Janisz, A., Heuer, U., Kikteva, Z., & Trautsch, A. (2023). A large-scale comparison of human-written versus ChatGPT-generated essays. Scientific 
Reports, 13 (1), Article 18617. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-45644-9
Hong, H., Vate-U-Lan, P., & Viriyavejakul, C. (2025). Cognitive offload instruction with generative AI: A quasi-experimental study on critical thinking gains in English 
writing. Forum for Linguistic Studies, 7 (7), 325 – 334. https://doi.org/10.30564/fls.v7i7.10072
Huang, J., & Mizumoto, A. (2024). Examining the effect of generative AI on students' motivation and writing self-efficacy. Digital Applied Linguistics, 1 , Article 102324. 
https://doi.org/10.29140/dal.v1.102324
Ironsi, C. S., & Solomon Ironsi, S. (2025). Experimental evidence for the efficacy of generative AI in improving students ’ writing skills. Quality assurance in education, 
33 (2), 237 – 252. https://doi.org/10.1108/qae-04-2024-0065 .
Jeon, J., Lee, S., & Choe, H. (2023). Beyond ChatGPT: A conceptual framework and systematic review of speech-recognition chatbots for language learning. Computers 
& Education, 206 , Article 104898. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2023.104898
Jiang, Y. (2025). Interaction and dialogue: Integration and application of artificial intelligence in blended mode writing feedback. The Internet and Higher Education, 
64 , Article 100975. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iheduc.2024.100975
Jiang, Y. L., Wu, Q., Yang, Y., Jian, C. L., & Zhao, J. (2026). Learner agency in revising GenAI-generated statements of purpose. British Journal of Educational 
Technology , 1 – 19. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.70041 . 00 .
Jin, F., Lin, C. H., & Lai, C. (2025). Modeling AI-assisted writing: How self-regulated learning influences writing outcomes. Computers in Human Behavior, 165 , Article 
108538. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2024.108538
Jose, B., Joseph, D., Mohan, V., Alexander, E., Varghese, S. K., & Roy, A. (2025). Outsourcing cognition: The psychological costs of AI-era convenience. Frontiers in 
Psychology, 16 , Article 1645237. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2025.1645237
Kapur, M. (2016). Examining productive failure, productive success, unproductive failure, and unproductive success in learning. Educational Psychologist, 51 (2), 
289 – 299. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2016.1155457
Kerman, N. T., Noroozi, O., Banihashem, S. K., Karami, M., & Biemans, H. J. (2024). Online peer feedback patterns of success and failure in argumentative essay 
writing. Interactive Learning Environments, 32 (2), 614 – 626. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2022.2093914
Koltovskaia, S., Rahmati, P., & Saeli, H. (2024). Graduate students' use of ChatGPT for academic text revision: Behavioral, cognitive, and affective engagement. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 65 , Article 101130. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2024.101130
Kosmyna, N., Hauptmann, E., Yuan, Y. T., Situ, J., Liao, X. H., Beresnitzky, A. V., … Maes, P. (2025). Your brain on ChatGPT: Accumulation of cognitive debt when 
using an AI assistant for essay writing task. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.08872, 4 .
Lee, S. S., & Moore, R. L. (2024). Harnessing Generative AI (GenAI) for automated feedback in higher education: A systematic review. Online Learning, 28 (3), 82 – 106. 
https://doi.org/10.24059/olj.v28i3.4593
Li, R. (2025). Critiquing ChatGPT compositions: Collaborative annotation as an approach to enhancing students' metalinguistic awareness of AI-generated writing. 
Thresholds in Education, 48 (1), 7 – 24 .
Li, S. (2025). Generative AI and second language writing. Digital Studies in Language and Literature, 2 (10), 122 – 152. https://doi.org/10.1515/dsll-2025-0007
Li, M., & Tekwa, K. (2025). Timing AI intervention in the writing process for low proficiency learners: relationship with motivation, self-efficacy, and performance: 
Timing AI intervention in the writing process for low proficiency learners: relationship with motivation, self-efficacy, and performance. European Journal of 
Psychology of Education, 40 (4), 120. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10212-025-01030-9 .
Lin, S., & Crosthwaite, P. (2024). The grass is not always greener: Teacher vs. GPT-assisted written corrective feedback. System, 127 , Article 103529. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.system.2024.103529
Liu, M., Zhang, L. J., & Biebricher, C. (2024). Investigating students' cognitive processes in generative AI-assisted digital multimodal composing and traditional 
writing. Computers & Education, 211 , Article 104977. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2023.104977
Lundstrom, K., & Baker, W. (2009). To give is better than to receive: The benefits of peer review to the reviewer's own writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 18 
(1), 30 – 43. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2008.06.002
Martin, I. A., & Sippel, L. (2021). Is giving better than receiving?: The effects of peer and teacher feedback on L2 pronunciation skills. Journal of Second Language 
Pronunciation, 7 (1), 62 – 88. https://doi.org/10.1075/jslp.20001.mar
Mohammad, T., Alzubi, A. A. F., Nazim, M., & Khan, S. I. (2023). Assessing the effectiveness of QuillBot-mediated instruction in enhancing EFL students' paraphrasing 
skills. Journal of Theoretical and Applied Information Technology, 101 (24), 8349 – 8357. https://www.researchgate.net/publication/377363834 .
Nakkaew, N., & Adunyarittigun, D. (2019). An initial development of an analytic rubric for assessing critical thinking in English argumentative essays of EFL colleges 
students. Reflections, 26 (2), 51 – 74. https://doi.org/10.61508/refl.v26i2.241755
Nicol, D. (2012). Resituating feedback from the reactive to the proactive. In D. Boud, & E. Molloy (Eds.), Feedback in higher and professional education (pp. 34 – 49). 
Routledge . 
Nicol, D., Thomson, A., & Breslin, C. (2014). Rethinking feedback practices in higher education: A peer review perspective. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher 
Education, 39 (1), 102 – 122. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2013.795518
Ocampo, R., Bown, O., & Grace, K. (2025). Beyond chat: Collaborative editors enhance human involvement and agency when co-writing with large language models. 
Retrieve online via https://computationalcreativity.net/iccc25/wp-content/uploads/papers/iccc25-ocampo2025beyond.pdf .
Olinghouse, N. G., Graham, S., & Gillespie, A. (2015). The relationship of discourse and topic knowledge to fifth graders' writing performance. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 107 , 391 – 406. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0037549
Oliveira, M., Zednik, C., Bombaerts, G., Sadowski, B., & Conijn, R. (2025). Assessing students' DRIVE: A framework to evaluate learning through interactions with 
generative AI. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence , Article 100497. https://doi-org.eproxy.lib.hku.hk/10.1016/j.caeai.2025.100497 .
Osawa, K. (2023). Integrating automated written corrective feedback into e-portfolios for second language writing: Notion and notion AI. RELC Journal, 55 (3), 
881 – 887. https://doi.org/10.1177/00336882231198913
Pajares, F., & Valiante, G. (2001). Gender differences in writing motivation and achievement of middle school students: A function of gender orientation? 
Contemporary Educational Psychology, 26 (3), 366 – 381. https://doi.org/10.1006/Ceps.2000.1069
Pajares, F., Valiante, G., & Cheong, Y. F. (2007). Writing self-efficacy and its relation to gender, writing motivation and writing competence: A developmental 
perspective. In S. Hidi, & P. Boscolo (Eds.), Writing and motivation (pp. 141 – 159). Elsevier . 
Pak, M. (2024). Productive failure and GenAI. Double Helix: A Journal of Critical Thinking and Writing, 12 (1), 1 – 3. https://doi.org/10.37514/dbh-j.2024.12.1.09
Pan, Z., & Zhang, Y. (2025). Exploring L2 writing motivation in AI-mediated EFL contexts: The role of teacher affective support, AI literacy, and self-efficacy through 
the lens of self-determination theory. Learning and Motivation, 92 , Article 102214. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lmot.2025.102214
Patchan, M. M., & Schunn, C. D. (2015). Understanding the benefits of providing peer feedback: How students respond to peers' texts of varying quality. Instructional 
Science, 43 (5), 591 – 614. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11251-015-9353-x
Rahimi, M., & Katal, M. (2012). Metacognitive strategies awareness and success in learning English as a foreign language: An overview. Procedia - Social and Behavioral 
Sciences, 31 , 73 – 81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2011.12.019
Rakovi ´c, M., Marzouk, Z., Liaqat, A., Winne, P. H., & Nesbit, J. C. (2020). Fine grained analysis of students' online discussion posts. Computers & Education, 157 , Article 
103982. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2020.103982
Rivera-Novoa, A., & Duarte Arias, D. A. (2025). Generative artificial intelligence and extended cognition in science learning contexts. Science & Education , 1 – 22. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11191-025-00660-1
Saldana, J. (2021). The Coding Manual for Qualitative Researchers (4th ed.). SAGE Publications . 
Shi, H., & Aryadoust, V. (2024). A systematic review of AI-based automated written feedback research. ReCALL, 36 (2), 187 – 209. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
s0958344023000265
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
22 
Sweller, J. (2011). Cognitive load theory. In J. P. Mestre, & B. H. Ross (Eds.), The psychology of learning and motivation (Vol. 55, pp. 37–76). Academic Press. https:// 
doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-387691-1.00002-8. 
Tan, J. S., & Chen, W. (2022). Peer feedback to support collaborative knowledge improvement: What kind of feedback feed-forward? Computers & Education, 187, 
Article 104467. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2022.104467
Teng, F. (2020). Tertiary-level students' English writing performance and metacognitive awareness: A group metacognitive support perspective. Scandinavian Journal 
of Educational Research, 64(4), 551–568. https://doi.org/10.1080/00313831.2019.1595712
Teng, M. F. (2025a). Understanding EFL student writers' metacognitive awareness in utilizing ChatGPT. System. , Article 103848. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
system.2025.103848
Teng, M. F. (2025b). Metacognitive awareness and EFL learners' perceptions and experiences in utilizing ChatGPT for writing feedback. European Journal of Education, 
60(1), Article e12811. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12811
Teng, M. F., & Ma, M. (2024). Assessing metacognition-based student feedback literacy for academic writing. Assessing Writing, 59, Article 100811. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.asw.2024.100811
Vaccaro, M., Almaatouq, A., & Malone, T. (2024). When combinations of humans and AI are useful: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Nature Human Behaviour, 8 
(12), 2293–2303. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41562-024-02024-1
Wang, C., & Wang, Z. (2025). Investigating L2 writers' critical AI literacy in AI-assisted writing: An APSE model. Journal of Second Language Writing, 67, Article 
101187. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2025.101187
Wu, Y., & Schunn, C. D. (2023). Passive, active, and constructive engagement with peer feedback: A revised model of learning from peer feedback. Contemporary 
Educational Psychology, 73, Article 102160. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cedpsych.2023.102160
Wu, J., Wang, J., Lei, S., Wu, F., & Gao, X. (2025). The impact of metacognitive scaffolding on deep learning in a GenAI-supported learning environment. Interactive 
Learning Environments, 1–18. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2025.2479162
Wu, Q., & Xu, A. (2025). Poe or Gemini for fostering writing skills in Japanese upper-intermediate learners: Uncovering the consequences on positive emotions, 
boredom to write, academic self-efficacy and writing development. British Educational Research Journal. https://doi.org/10.1002/berj.4119
Xu, X., Sun, F., & Hu, W. (2025). Integrating human expertise with GenAI: Insights into a collaborative feedback approach in translation education. System, 129, 
Article 103600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2025.103600
Yang, Y., Luo, J., Yang, M., Yang, R., & Chen, J. (2024). From surface to deep learning approaches with Generative AI in higher education: An analytical framework of 
student agency. Studies in Higher Education, 49(5), 817–830. https://doi.org/10.1080/03075079.2024.2327003
Yao, Y., Sun, Y., Zhu, S., & Zhu, X. (2025). A qualitative inquiry into metacognitive strategies of postgraduate students in employing ChatGPT for English academic 
writing. European Journal of Education, 60(1), Article e12824. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12824
Yao, Y., Zhu, X., Xiao, L., & Lu, Q. (2025). Secondary school English teachers' application of artificial intelligence-guided chatbot in the provision of feedback on 
student writing: An activity theory perspective. Journal of Second Language Writing, 67, Article 101179. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2025.101179
Zaheer, S., Ma, C., Zhu, Y., & Vasinda, S. (2025). GenAI in academic writing-empowering learners or redefining traditional pedagogical practices?: A systematic 
review from 2019-2023. International Journal of Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Teaching and Learning, 1(1), 1–34. https://doi.org/10.4018/ijaitl.373582
Zeng, X. M., & Ravindran, L. (2024). The effects of peer feedback provision and reception on lower-proficiency EFL learners' writing development. Studies In 
Educational Evaluation, 83, Article 101422. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2024.101422
Zeng, X., Ravindran, L., & Amini, M. (2023). Teaching critical thinking to Chinese students in EFL writing: A review. International Journal of Evaluation and Research in 
Education, 12(3), 1735–1746. https://doi.org/10.11591/ijere.v12i3.24699
Zhan, Y., Boud, D., Dawson, P., & Yan, Z. (2025). Generative artificial intelligence as an enabler of student feedback engagement: A framework. Higher Education 
Research and Development, 44(5), 1289–1304. https://doi.org/10.1080/07294360.2025.2476513
Zhang, Y., Schunn, C. D., & Wu, Y. (2024). Interconnecting peer feedback literacy: Exploring the relationship between providing and acting on peer feedback. Studies 
In Educational Evaluation, 83, Article 101411. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stueduc.2024.101411
Zhou, J., Zheng, Y., & Tai, J. H. M. (2020). Grudges and gratitude: The social-affective impacts of peer assessment. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 45(3), 
345–358. https://doi.org/10.1080/02602938.2019.1643449
Zong, Z., Schunn, C. D., & Wang, Y. (2021). What aspects of online peer feedback robustly predict growth in students' task performance? Computers in Human Behavior, 
124, Article 106924. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2021.106924
Zou, B., Wang, C., He, H., Li, C., Purwanto, E., & Wang, P. (2025). Enhancing EFL writing with visualised GenAI feedback: A cognitive affective theory of learning 
perspective on revision quality, emotional response, and human-computer interaction. Learning and Motivation, 91, Article 102158. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
lmot.2025.102158
Anonymized references
Guo, K., & Wang, D. (2024). To resist it or to embrace it? Examining chatgpt's potential to support teacher feedback in EFL writing. Education and Information 
Technologies, 29(7), 8435–8463. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-023-12146-0
C. Lai et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                             Computers & Education 252 (2026) 105675 
23 