Robot-assisted speaking practice (RASP): Learner affection, 
engagement, outcomes, and their interplay
Ruofei Zhang
a
, Di Zou
b , *
, Haoran Xie
c
, Gary Cheng
d
a
Centre for English and Additional Languages, Lingnan University, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China
b
Department of English and Communication, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China
c
Division of Artificial Intelligence, School of Data Science, Lingnan University, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China
d
Department of Mathematics and Information Technology, The Education University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of 
China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
EFL speaking
Robot-assisted language learning
Social robot
Technology-enhanced language learning
ABSTRACT
Robots are increasingly utilised in language education to physically accompany learners, simulate 
natural communication through verbal and non-verbal cues, and thereby engage students in 
various academic tasks, demonstrating potential in improving learner affection, engagement, and 
language proficiency. So far, research on using robots specifically for developing English as a 
Foreign Language (EFL) speaking skill, along with associated learner affection and engagement, 
remains limited, despite the significance of developing EFL speaking skills and setting-specific 
exploration of learner affection and engagement. To address this gap, we employed a NAO 
robot to assist 49 Chinese undergraduate students in EFL speaking practice over eight sessions, 
examining their affection, engagement, outcomes, and the interplay among these factors within 
the robot-assisted speaking practice (RASP). Data collection included interviews and pre- and 
post-questionnaires and speaking tests. Findings indicated positive learner affection, deep 
engagement, and satisfactory EFL speaking proficiency outcomes compared to the baselines. 
While learner affection significantly enhanced engagement with RASP, neither affection nor 
engagement had a statistically significant impact on EFL speaking outcomes. Based on these re -
sults, we identified the advantages of robots over alternative technologies, peers, and teachers as 
the interlocutor in assisting speaking practice among adult learners, thereby enriching the robot- 
assisted language learning framework. We recommend implementing RASP to foster under -
graduate EFL speaking development, particularly with a high-quality robot voice and speech 
recognition system.
1. Introduction
Rapid advancements in robotics have stimulated growing scholarly interest in robot-assisted learning across domains, including 
language education ( Atman Uslu et al., 2023 ). As educational tools, robots are tangible machines capable of physically interacting with 
learners ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ), adopting diverse social roles ( van den Berghe et al., 2019 ), and simulating natural face-to-face 
communication (Deng et al., 2024), thus supporting a wide range of language pedagogical tasks, such as delivering instructional 
* Corresponding author. HHB914, PolyU Hung Hom Bay Campus, 8 Hung Lok Road, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong Special Administrative 
Region of China.
E-mail addresses: ruofeizh@gmail.com (R. Zhang), dizoudaisy@gmail.com (D. Zou), hrxie@ln.edu.hk (H. Xie), chengks@eduhk.hk (G. Cheng). 
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Computers & Education
journal homepag e: www.el sevier.com/loc ate/compe du
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2026.105635
Received 13 May 2025; Received in revised form 13 December 2025; Accepted 7 April 2026  
Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
Available online 11 April 2026 
0360-1315/© 2026 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license 
( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/ ). 
researchers believe that these combined features make NAO a powerful tool for supporting a variety of learning tasks, including EFL 
speaking practice ( Shin & Shin, 2015 ).
Research has indicated the overall effectiveness of robot assistance in developing language proficiency and explained it through 
various theories ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ), such as the theory of immediacy behaviours. Immediacy behaviours refer to verbal and 
non-verbal communication techniques and actions that demonstrate closeness among people, such as sharing personal anecdotes, 
offering prompt feedback, praising and encouraging, maintaining eye contact, nodding, and enacting gestures ( Finn & Schrodt, 2012 ). 
In language learning, this theory argues that teachers' immediacy behaviours can reduce physical and psychological distance between 
teachers and students, thereby enhancing learners’ affection, engagement, and overall language learning efficiency ( Hu & Wang, 
2023 ). Robots can perform immediacy behaviours by being physically present with students and employing various verbal and 
non-verbal communication techniques via synthesised voice, gestures, body movements, and LED eye movements ( Derakhshan et al., 
2024 ), thus bridging the psychological and physical distances with learners ( Lee & Lee, 2022 ). Consequently, language learners are 
more likely to perceive robots as social agents, develop affective attachment to them, and thus have better affection and deeper 
engagement ( van den Berghe et al., 2019 ). For example, Wang et al. (2013) had 31 elementary learners practise EFL speaking with 
robots, finding that students, especially the low-proficient ones, felt a connection with the robot and perceived it as a peer. Feeling 
comfortable interacting with the robot, students demonstrated deep engagement in the practice and achieved satisfactory outcomes 
( Wang et al., 2013 ). Hence, robots may improve affection, engagement, and outcomes in language learning by performing immediacy 
behaviours.
The embodied learning theory has also been used to analyse robot-assisted language learning ( Khazaie & Derakhshan, 2024 ; Pruss, 
2022 ), which emphasises the deep connection between cognitive processes and bodily experiences in learning ( Anttila & Svendler 
Nielsen, 2019 ; Anttila, 2018 ). In language learning, the theory posits that multisensory and physical interactions with language 
learning materials and tasks, such as having face-to-face Q&A sessions in the target language, could enhance cognitive engagement in 
language learning and thus increase the efficiency of developing language knowledge and skills ( Jusslin et al., 2022 ). From this 
perspective, robots are highly promising due to their tangibility and ability to display eye gaze, gestures, and body movements, thereby 
offering embodied experiences of natural language use ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ). For example, Khazaie and Derakhshan (2024)
investigated robot-assisted EFL learning for medical purposes over 15 weeks, where a robot presented virtual patients' histories and 
needs audibly and visually in EFL and required the students to understand patients' situations and select appropriate medical sug -
gestions. Formative assessments demonstrated the significant effectiveness of robot assistance in developing EFL listening and reading, 
regardless of learners’ language proficiency levels. The researchers explained that robot-assisted language learning provided embodied 
experiences of applying language knowledge and skills in medical settings, which enhanced cognitive processes supporting 
comprehension. Hence, robots may improve learner engagement and outcomes in language learning by bringing about bodily ex -
periences of natural language use.
Robot-assisted language learning can also be explained through the affective filter theory ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ), which 
highlights the importance of positive learner affection in processing and developing language knowledge and skills ( Sheen, 2008 ). 
From this perspective, robot-assisted language learning appears promising. Learners have overall positive affection in robot-assisted 
language learning, exhibiting reduced anxiety, increased comfort, higher self-efficacy, and stronger motivation ( Lin et al., 2022 ), 
attributed to robots' multimodal, non-judgemental, supportive communicative manners ( Lin et al., 2022 ; Randall, 2019 ), as well as 
learners’ intrinsic curiosity about robots ( van den Berghe et al., 2019 ). For example, Alemi et al. (2015) found that 30 students learning 
EFL vocabulary through robot-assisted language learning reported significantly higher levels of confidence, fun, and satisfaction, 
compared to 16 students using traditional methods, attributing this to the novelty and enjoyment of robot interactions. Alemi et al. 
(2017) noted similar positive affection among 19 EFL learners after a robot-assisted language learning programme, highlighting the 
supportive environment created by robots. Hence, robot-assisted language learning may facilitate language development by improving 
learner affection ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ).
Supported by these theoretical frameworks, many researchers have argued for robots' overall advantages over 2D technologies in 
assisting language learning with empirical evidence. For example, in comparison with chatbot-assisted learning, Derakhshan et al. 
(2025) compared robot-assisted language learning with chatbot-assisted learning in a 16-session programme focused on developing 
EFL speaking for medical purposes. Learners interacted with a robot in medical role-plays, listening to reports, making medical 
suggestions, and giving medical-themed commands in EFL. When students' utterances exhibited sufficient accuracy and fluency, the 
robot would perform actions following their orders. The control group completed the same tasks through oral conversations with a 
chatbot. The researchers found that robot-assisted language learning was significantly more effective than chatbot-assisted learning in 
developing EFL speaking for medical purposes and fostering enjoyment in communication, attributing this to robots’ greater ability to 
elicit learner empathy and enhance engagement. Similarly, based on a 15-week experiment, Khazaie and Derakhshan (2024) found a 
significant advantage of robot-assisted learning over online learning in developing EFL listening and reading skills. Meta-analyses by 
Lee and Lee (2022) and Wu and Li (2024) also reported a medium-sized average effect of robot-assisted language learning compared to 
traditional or other technology-mediated learning conditions.
Despite its overall usefulness, robot-assisted language learning does not always lead to significant language development. Its 
effectiveness may vary across different language skills. Lee and Lee (2022) found that robot-assisted language learning is most effective 
in developing vocabulary, owing to robots' advantages in delivering language knowledge. Additionally, the type of robot involved in 
the learning may significantly affect learning outcomes, as different robotic models, features, and functions influence the educational 
process in distinct ways. For instance, Randall (2019) suggests that anthropomorphic robots, which excel at emulating human 
communication, may be particularly effective for language learning. Age is also considered an important factor influencing the 
effectiveness of robot-assisted language learning. Research shows that young learners, such as kindergartners and elementary students, 
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
6 
benefit more from robot-assisted language learning than secondary and adult students due to greater interest and engagement 
( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ; Lee & Lee, 2022 ). The robot's role in language learning activities also influences effectiveness. Robot-assisted 
language learning is generally more effective when robots function as peers rather than teachers ( Lee & Lee, 2022 ; van den Berghe 
et al., 2019 ). This is because learners tend to feel more confident, experience greater social comfort, and develop a stronger sense of 
relatedness with peer robots, leading to deeper engagement in robot-assisted language learning ( Randall, 2019 ).
2.5. Existing studies and research gaps
Drawing on extensive prior research, we have identified several key factors central to EFL speaking practice and robot-assisted 
language learning. In terms of EFL speaking practice, it is a crucial means of developing speaking proficiency ( Bailey, 2003 ) and 
involves dynamics among the learner ( Subject ), speaking tasks ( Object ), and interlocutors ( Community ) ( Engestr ¨om, 2001a ; Harmer, 
2007 ) from the perspective of activity theory. Traditionally, interlocutors are teachers or peers who manage the conversational flow 
and offer language input and feedback; however, challenges such as large class sizes and interlocutors ’ language proficiency often 
constrain this support ( Dao, 2020 ). Two principal factors influence the academic outcomes of speaking practice. One is learner 
engagement, encompassing behavioural, cognitive, emotional, and social dimensions ( Philp et al., 2010 ), widely acknowledged as 
vital for language development ( Hiver et al., 2020 ). In the context of EFL speaking practice, deeper engagement leads to better 
development in speaking proficiency ( Zhang et al., 2020 ). The other principal factor is learner affection. From the perspective of 
activity theory, learner affection in EFL speaking practice can be analysed from the aspects of the learner ( Subject ), speaking tasks 
( Object ), and interlocutors ( Community ) ( Engestr ¨om, 2001a ; Harmer, 2007 ), comprising self-efficacy ( Peng & Woodrow, 2010 ), social 
comfort ( Archbell & Coplan, 2022 ), and task perception ( Wesely, 2012 ). Positive affective states promote engagement ( Zeinivand 
et al., 2015 ) and improvements in speaking proficiency ( Mahripah, 2013 ; Sheen, 2008 ), although excessive confidence or social 
comfort may sometimes hinder progress ( Klassen, 2006 ).
In terms of robot-assisted language learning, it involves learners developing language knowledge and skills through interacting 
with robots ( Lin et al., 2022 ). In this context, robots physically accompany learners and perform immediacy behaviours, assign 
learning tasks, recognise learner oral output, provide high-quality language input and feedback, and deliver supportive, 
non-judgemental communication ( Randall, 2019 ). Empirical research has demonstrated the effectiveness of robots in assisting various 
language learning activities, including speaking practice (e.g., Lee et al., 2011 ), and improving learner affection, engagement, and 
language learning outcomes ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ; Randall, 2019 ), theoretically grounded in frameworks, such as immediacy 
behaviour theory, embodied learning theory, and affective filter theory.
Despite a substantial body of research, several gaps persist. Firstly, although developing speaking skills is a fundamental goal in EFL 
education ( Harmer, 2007 ; Suban, 2021 ), and robots hold considerable promise in supporting speaking practice and proficiency 
development, research specifically addressing robot-assisted development of speaking skills remains limited ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ; 
Randall, 2019 ). Existing studies in this direction are mainly for elementary education and presenting mixed findings. For example, Lee 
et al. (2011) engaged 24 elementary EFL learners in 17 sessions of robot-assisted language learning, where robots provided pro -
nunciation training, feedback, and role-play interactions; their pre- and post-test results indicated significant improvements in 
speaking proficiency. Conversely, Hong (2016) found no significant gains in speaking proficiency among 25 elementary learners using 
robot-assisted learning compared to 27 peers in conventional classrooms. Similarly, In and Han (2015) observed no significant 
improvement in speaking skills and noted potential negative impacts on learner intonation attributed to the robot's unnatural speech 
patterns. Given the considerable variation in speaking practice topics and complexity across educational levels, alongside these 
conflicting results, the generalisability of existing findings is limited. To develop a more comprehensive understanding of the effec -
tiveness of robots in assisting speaking practice and developing speaking proficiency, further empirical research appears meaningful, 
particularly at educational levels beyond elementary, to inform future implementation strategies.
Secondly, investigation of learner engagement in robot-assisted language learning remains limited. Previous studies have shown 
that robot assistance can improve language learning outcomes by fostering deep cognitive engagement (e.g., Khazaie & Derakhshan, 
2024 ; Shin & Shin, 2015 ). However, learner engagement is multidimensional, encompassing cognitive, behavioural, emotional, and 
social aspects that often interrelate ( Philp & Duchesne, 2016 ). It is possible that robot-assisted language learning fosters learner 
engagement across multiple dimensions, collectively contributing to its effectiveness. Moreover, research has shown that learner 
engagement may mediate the impacts of learner affection on language learning outcomes (e.g., Mahripah, 2013 ; Zeinivand et al., 
2015 ), which may apply to robot-assisted language learning. Supporting our hypothesis, Wang et al. (2013) observed that EFL learners 
experiencing more social comfort in robot-assisted language learning tended to be more engaged in academic tasks and achieve better 
learning outcomes. Nonetheless, the interplay among learner affection, engagement, and outcomes remains underexplored in 
robot-assisted language learning. Given the importance of learner engagement in language learning ( Philp & Duchesne, 2016 ), it 
appears necessary to investigate learner engagement in robot-assisted language learning from different dimensions and examine its 
interplay with learner affection and outcomes, so as to provide a deeper understanding of robot-assisted language learning and inform 
its effective implementation.
2.6. Conceptual framework: RASP
To address research gaps, we propose RASP as a promising method to develop EFL speaking proficiency. Grounded in activity 
theory, RASP comprises three main elements ( Fig. 2 ): (a) the EFL learner ( Subject ); (b) the speaking practice ( Object ), specifically, Q & A 
sessions ( Lin et al., 2022 ); and (c) a robot and peer learners as interlocutors ( Community ). The three elements interact. The speaking 
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
7 
practice ( Object ) involves the learner ( Subject ), the robot, and peers ( Community ) in EFL Q & A sessions as interlocutors. The robot 
( Community ) initiates the practice ( Object ), introduces the task to the learner ( Subject ) ( Randall, 2019 ), and participates in the Q & A 
sessions ( Object ) by asking questions, sharing personal anecdotes, and encouraging learner output (Deng et al., 2024). Following 
discussions with peers ( Community ), the learner ( Subject ) answers questions, which are then supported by linguistic scaffolding, and 
encouragement from the robot and peers ( Community ) ( van den Berghe et al., 2019 ). Eventually, the speaking practice ( Object ) may 
lead to the development of EFL speaking proficiency ( Outcome ).
RASP may enhance EFL speaking proficiency comprehensively across multiple dimensions, including coherence, fluency, lexical 
resource, grammatical range and accuracy, and pronunciation ( Chen, 2025 ), by fostering learner affection and engagement, while 
controlling for learners ’ baseline levels ( Fig. 3 ).
Regarding learner affection, robots can create a supportive, non-threatening, and enjoyable environment for speaking practice ( Lin 
et al., 2022 ; Randall, 2019 ) by enabling multisensory communications ( Alemi et al., 2015 , 2017 ) and creating physical and mental 
immediacy ( Lee & Lee, 2022 ). Positive learner affection in RASP is reflected on three dimensions: (a) social comfort ( Archbell & 
Coplan, 2022 ), reflecting learners ’ ease and confidence in interactions with peers and robots ( Community ); (b) EFL speaking 
self-efficacy ( Peng & Woodrow, 2010 ), reflecting learner confidence ( Subject ) in practice; and (c) task perception ( Aubrey et al., 2022 ), 
concerning motivation, interest, and perceived usefulness of the practice ( Object ). According to affective filter theory ( Sheen, 2008 ), 
learners with better affection in RASP process language knowledge and skills more efficiently, thereby achieving better EFL speaking 
development.
Regarding learner engagement, it reflects on four dimensions in RASP: (a) behavioural engagement ( Gobert et al., 2015 ), such as 
listening to and answering the robot's questions; (b) cognitive engagement ( Plass et al., 2015 ), involving the recall of language 
knowledge and response planning; (c) emotional engagement ( Philp & Duchesne, 2016 ), including sense of belonging and enjoyment 
during practice; and (d) social engagement ( Svalberg, 2009 ), encompassing interactions with the robot and peers. Robots can provide 
bodily experiences of face-to-face EFL speaking practice and thus foster deep learner engagement in speaking practice, following the 
embodied learning theory ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ). Moreover, robot assistance can further enhance learner engagement by fostering 
positive learner affection, following the theory of planned behaviour ( Ajzen, 2005 ) and the expectancy-value theory ( Wigfield & 
Eccles, 2000 ). Deeper engagement in RASP should lead to better outcomes in terms of EFL speaking proficiency, aligning with the 
engagement theories ( Hiver et al., 2020 ) and the noticing hypothesis ( Schmidt, 2012 ).
By developing, implementing, and investigating RASP among EFL university students, this study aims to elucidate the mechanisms 
through which robots assist with speaking practices as the interlocutor and facilitate speaking proficiency development via learner 
affection and engagement at the higher educational level. In doing so, the study may contribute to a more comprehensive under -
standing of the application and effectiveness of robots in assisting EFL speaking practice and proficiency enhancement ( Derakhshan 
et al., 2024 ; Randall, 2019 ). Furthermore, we explored the multidimensional nature of learner engagement, including cognitive, 
behavioural, emotional, and social dimensions, and its interaction with learner affection and learning outcomes within robot-assisted 
language learning contexts, an essential area that remains underexplored. Ultimately, this research aims to generate evidence-based 
insights to inform the design and effective implementation of RASP interventions and advance theoretical understanding of 
robot-assisted language learning and EFL speaking development.
Fig. 2. Elements of RASP in light of the activity theory.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
8 
3. Method
We adopted a concurrent triangulation mixed-methods approach, simultaneously collecting, analysing, and interpreting skill test 
scores, questionnaire responses, and interview transcripts for cross-validation and corroboration (see Riazi & Farsani, 2023 ). To 
control for baseline factors, we administered pre- and post-questionnaires and tests to examine learner affection, engagement, and 
outcomes of RASP.
3.1. Participants
Through convenience sampling, we recruited a total of 50 undergraduate Chinese students in a university of Hong Kong. All 
students were required to achieve an IELTS score of 6.5 for graduation and had voluntarily enrolled in an English-medium course 
designed to prepare them for the IELTS test, indicating strong motivation to enhance their EFL proficiency. Students completed an 
online pre-treatment survey collecting demographic information, their needs for developing EFL speaking proficiency, and their 
perceptions and prior experiences with technology-enhanced learning, EFL speaking practices, and robot-assisted learning.
Based on the survey, all students reported strong needs for developing EFL speaking proficiency and some experiences with 
technology-enhanced learning and conventional EFL speaking practices, including self-regulated, peer-based, or teacher-led methods. 
None had prior experience with robot-assisted learning. After excluding one student who reported technophobia, the final cohort 
comprised 49 participants (22 females and 27 males), aged 18 to 23.
Before the intervention, each participant signed a consent form affirming that (a) their personal information would remain 
confidential, (b) their performance and participation would not affect their academic standing, and (c) they could withdraw from the 
study at any time without consequence.
3.2. Instruments
3.2.1. Practice materials
We developed 50 sets of practice materials, each consisting of one Q & A session ( Lin et al., 2022 ) and linguistic scaffolding (Deng 
et al., 2024). Each Q & A session included three authentic IELTS speaking questions sourced from the British Council website ( https:// 
takeielts.britishcouncil.org/take-ielts/prepare/free-ielts-english-practice-tests/speaking ). Each session focused on a specific theme (e. 
g., the use of technology) to establish a coherent context for speaking activities, as recommended by Lin et al. (2022) . The questions 
were sequenced from lower to higher levels of complexity, aiming to scaffold learners and facilitate steady progress. For example: 
● Question One: “ What kind of technology do you often use in your daily life? ”
Fig. 3. Underlying mechanism of the effectiveness of RASP.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
9 
● Question Two: “ How has technology changed the way people communicate? ”
● Question Three: “ Do you think rapid technological development could negatively impact society? Why or why not? ”
The linguistic scaffolding was aligned with the Q & A session. Two experts with over five years of IELTS teaching experience 
reviewed all question sets. For each question, they selected two vocabulary words, phrases, or sentence structures to enhance learners ’ 
responses. For instance, for the question regarding negative societal impacts, they recommended the terms “ exacerbate ” and “ detri -
mental effects. ” The first author then developed instructional explanations and usage examples for each term, consulting the Longman 
Dictionary of Contemporary English Online ( https://www.ldoceonline.com/ ). The following is an example instruction of “ detrimental 
effects ” :
To further enhance your answer, you may include the phrase “ detrimental effects, ” which refers to harmful or damaging conse -
quences. For example, you could say, “ The rapid development of technology could have detrimental effects on employment and 
privacy in the future. ”
Two experts in IELTS preparation and EFL education subsequently validated the reliability and suitability of the linguistic scaf -
folding for supporting university students ’ EFL academic speaking development.
3.2.2. NAO: Robot for assisting speaking practices
We employed a NAO robot to implement RASP due to NAO's evidenced usefulness in supporting EFL learning activities (e.g., Shin & 
Shin, 2015 ). Supporting synthesised voice and speech recognition, NAO can serve as the robot interlocutor ( Community ) in RASP that 
initiates and participates in the practice ( Objec t) and interacts with learners ( Subject ) by introducing academic tasks, asking questions, 
encouraging learner output, and giving feedback and linguistic scaffolding ( Deng et al., 2024 ; Lin et al., 2022 ; Randall, 2019 ). These 
functionalities directly contribute to the development of EFL speaking proficiency ( Outcome ), aligning with our proposed RASP 
framework.
Furthermore, NAO's capabilities align with the theoretical framework of RASP. NAO's human-like torso, articulated limbs, LED 
eyes, and multimodal communication systems facilitate multisensory interaction and bodily speaking experiences, thereby enhancing 
learner engagement and outcomes following embodied learning theory ( Khazaie & Derakhshan, 2024 ; Pruss, 2022 ). Its capacity to 
perform complex physical gestures and non-verbal social cues affords both physical and psychological immediacy ( Randall, 2019 ), 
which, consistent with immediacy behaviour theory ( Finn & Schrodt, 2012 ), fosters improved learner affection, engagement, and 
academic performance. Additionally, NAO can support multimodal, supportive, and non-judgemental communicative style following 
pre-programmed models, so as to stimulate learner curiosity and positive affection ( Shin & Shin, 2015 ; Valagkouti et al., 2022 ), further 
enhancing learning outcomes as explained by affective filter theory ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ). Collectively, these features position 
NAO as a highly effective tool for implementing the RASP framework.
Using Choregraphe, the official programming software for NAO, we designed and executed NAO's interactive behaviours for each 
RASP session. Each RASP session, lasting approximately 15 min, was based on one of the 50 practice material sets. For each session, 
NAO greeted the students and introduced the task. Upon receiving affirmative responses such as “ Ready ” or “ OK, ” NAO initiated the 
Q & A by sequentially asking three questions and encouraging learners to discuss their answers with peers ( “ You may discuss the answer 
with peers. ” ). After recognising learner responses, NAO acknowledged their contributions ( “ Wow! You made a very good point! ” ), 
provided immediate feedback ( “ Your answer is very good! ” ) and encouragement ( “ Well done! ” ), and related personally to their an -
swers ( “ Like you, I also want to study abroad, perhaps majoring in classical music. ” ). Additionally, NAO offered linguistic scaffolding 
and prompted students to apply the new vocabulary or structures in a subsequent attempt ( “ Please try to answer the question again, 
using the new word! ” ). Once all three questions had been asked and answered twice, NAO concluded the session. Throughout the 
interaction, NAO used synthesised speech, gestures, body movements, and LED signals in a vivid and flexible manner.
3.2.3. Pre- and post-tests on EFL speaking proficiency
To evaluate RASP outcomes while controlling for baseline levels, we conducted pre- and post-tests of learners' EFL speaking 
proficiency. Following the IELTS test format, participants completed individual face-to-face speaking assessments lasting approxi -
mately 10 min with the first author as examiner, who possesses extensive experience in assessing IELTS speaking tests. During the 
assessment, participants responded to three questions without access to reference materials. All questions were sourced from an 
authentic IELTS question bank ( https://ieltsbank.com/product/ielts-questionbank-premium ), ensuring high reliability, consistency, 
and validity. Participants ’ performances were video-recorded with their consent.
3.2.4. Pre- and post-questionnaires on learner affection
To assess learner affection in RASP while controlling for baseline factors, we administered a pre-questionnaire measuring affection 
in conventional EFL speaking practices and a post-questionnaire focusing on RASP. The questionnaires used a 10-point Likert scale, 
chosen for its accuracy, reliability, and suitability for advanced analytical techniques like Partial Least Squares Structural Equation 
Modelling (PLS-SEM) ( Dawes, 2008 ). The questionnaire comprised 17 items across three dimensions of learner affection identified in 
our literature review: social comfort, EFL speaking self-efficacy, and task perceptions ( Appendix A ).
Items 1 – 3 addressed social comfort and were adapted from Connor et al. ’ s (2001) abbreviated Social Phobia Inventory scale. For 
example: “ In EFL speaking practice, fear of embarrassment causes me to avoid doing things or interacting with peers. ”
Items 4 – 12 assessed EFL speaking self-efficacy and were adapted from Gan et al. ’ s (2022) scale on self-efficacy in EFL performance 
among Chinese university students (Cronbach's alpha ≥ 0.86). An example item is: “ I can speak English fluently in EFL speaking 
practices. ”
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
10 
Items 13 – 17 focused on task perceptions and were adapted from Ghani et al. ’ s (2019) validated scale (Cronbach's alpha = 0.85). An 
example item is: “ Developing English speaking via EFL speaking practices is a good idea. ”
3.2.5. Pre- and post-questionnaires on learner engagement
To measure learner engagement with RASP while controlling for baseline factors, we administered a pre-questionnaire on learner 
engagement in conventional EFL speaking practices and a post-questionnaire focusing on RASP. The questionnaire consisted of 12 
items rated on a 10-point Likert scale, covering four dimensions of learner engagement: behavioural engagement, cognitive 
engagement, emotional engagement, and social engagement ( Appendix B ).
Behavioural engagement (Items 1 – 3) and cognitive engagement (Items 4 – 6) items were adapted from Reeve (2013) (Cronbach's 
alpha > 0.84). An example item is: “ In EFL speaking practices, I work as hard as I can. ”
Emotional engagement (Items 7 – 9) and social engagement (Items 10 – 12) items were adapted from Deng et al. (2020) (Cronbach's 
alpha > 0.7; factor loadings > 0.70; AVE > 0.55). An example item is: “ I find EFL speaking practices interesting. ”
3.2.6. Interview questions
We conducted semi-structured interviews based on four groups of questions aligned with the research questions: 
RQ1:
● How do you feel about RASP? Why would you have such feelings?
RQ2:
● To what degree do you feel engaged in RASP? Why would you have such feelings?
RQ3:
● Do you believe your EFL speaking skills have improved through RASP? Why would/wouldn't you believe so?
RQ4:
● How do you think your affection towards RASP influences your engagement and EFL speaking development? Please explain the 
reason(s).
● Does your engagement in RASP influence your EFL speaking development? Why or why not?
These interview questions were refined and validated through a pilot study involving five students and expert recommendations, 
confirming their credibility.
3.3. Procedures
The experiment was conducted over eight weeks ( Fig. 4 ). In Week One, we collected and analysed students ’ biographical survey 
responses to select eligible participants. After obtaining signed consent forms, we conducted a 15-min orientation covering EFL 
speaking practices, robot-assisted language learning, learner affection, and engagement. Participants then completed pre- 
Fig. 4. Experimental workflow.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
11 
questionnaires on their affection and engagement in conventional speaking practices (approximately 10 min).
In Week Two, participants completed the 10-min pre-test on EFL speaking.
From Week Three to Week Six, participants attended two 15-min RASP sessions per week (eight sessions in total) following 
Randall's (2019) recommendations. Organised in groups of two to four, the students practiced speaking by interacting with NAO and 
group members ( Fig. 5 ). A research assistant provided technical support throughout.
In Week Seven, participants spent approximately 10 min completing the post-questionnaires on affection and engagement in RASP.
In Week Eight, participants completed a 10-min EFL speaking post-test. Two days later, ten participants were randomly selected for 
15-min semi-structured interviews conducted in conversational Chinese, their native language. We briefly re-explained the concepts of 
learner affection and engagement before asking participants to reflect on their RASP experiences and respond to specific questions.
3.4. Data analyses
3.4.1. Qualitative analysis
The authors collaboratively transcribed and analysed the interview data. We repeatedly reviewed the transcripts to familiarise 
ourselves with the content and developed initial codes aligned with the research questions: 
● RQ1: Learner perceptions and reasons for affection in RASP.
● RQ2: Learner perceptions and reasons for engagement in RASP.
● RQ3: Learner perceptions and reasons for EFL speaking proficiency outcomes from RASP.
● RQ4: Learner perceptions and reasons for the interplay between affection, engagement, and EFL speaking proficiency outcomes.
The research team analysed the transcripts using the established coding scheme, noting the frequency of key ideas and identifying 
representative quotations. We compared coding results and resolved discrepancies through discussion. Finally, we collaboratively 
translated the coding outcomes and quotations into English.
3.4.2. Qualitative rigour
We applied several techniques to ensure the trustworthiness of the qualitative part of our study, following Shenton (2004) .
Before the interviews, we piloted the interview questions with five students and revised them based on expert recommendations to 
confirm their clarity and alignment with the research aims.
Before data analysis, the research team critically reflected on their backgrounds and potential biases as experts in technology- 
enhanced language learning and fluent Chinese speakers. This reflection heightened our awareness of subjective interpretations 
that might overemphasise RASP's positive impacts while underrecognising negative feedback or challenges reported by participants.
During data analysis, the research team jointly coded three transcripts to develop and agree upon a consistent coding scheme. 
Fig. 5. Students engaging in RASP.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
12 
Following the scheme, we individually analysed the remaining transcripts, noting the frequency of key ideas and identifying repre -
sentative quotations. Individual coding results were compared, and discrepancies were resolved through discussion, ensuring inter -
pretative consistency. The procedures for data collection, transcription, coding, and analysis were documented for tracking.
After data analyses, interviewees were invited to review and confirmed the results of our analyses, validating the data accuracy.
Finally, we provide thick descriptions of the participants, interview context, and the semi-structured interview protocol, allowing 
readers to assess the applicability of findings to similar educational settings.
Collectively, these methodological strategies ensured the qualitative components of the study adhered to rigorous standards, 
strengthening the validity and reliability of insights into learners ’ experiences with robot-assisted speaking practice.
3.4.3. Quantitative analysis
This study involved two types of quantitative data: test scores and survey responses. All 49 participants completed the pre-test, 
while one participant missed the post-test. The first author and an experienced IELTS instructor independently scored participants' 
video-recorded performances based on IELTS criteria: coherence and fluency, lexical resource, grammatical range and accuracy, and 
pronunciation, each rated from 1 (minimal) to 9 (expert). The comparison of scores revealed high inter-rater reliability (Cohen's Kappa 
= 0.80), with any differences resolved through discussion.
For the questionnaire surveys, the authors collaboratively cleaned the data by removing incomplete and straight-lining responses, 
following Meade and Craig (2012) . After cleaning, 43 valid pre- and post-questionnaire responses remained for social comfort and EFL 
speaking self-efficacy. For task perceptions and learner engagement, 41 pre-questionnaire and 43 post-questionnaire responses were 
valid.
To address RQs 1 to 3, we conducted descriptive analyses focusing on means and standard deviations of questionnaire and test 
scores. Further investigation involved paired-sample t-tests via SPSS to identify differences between RASP and baselines in EFL 
speaking proficiency, learner affection, and engagement.
For RQ4, we performed PLS-SEM using the SEMinR package in R (R Core Team, 2019) to investigate relationships within our 
proposed two-level RASP model ( Appendix C , Table 1 ). Level 1 comprised three primary variables with corresponding baseline 
controls: (a) “ Learner affection in RASP, ” controlled by “ Baseline learner affection in conventional speaking practices ” ; (b) “ Learner 
engagement in RASP, ” controlled by “ Baseline learner engagement in conventional speaking practices ” ; and (c) “ Learning outcomes of 
RASP in EFL speaking proficiency, ” controlled by “ Baseline EFL speaking proficiency. ” “ Learner affection in RASP ” influences 
“ Learning outcomes of RASP in EFL speaking proficiency ” directly and indirectly via “ Learner engagement in RASP. ” At Level 2, all 
Level-1 variables were reflected by indicators identified in the literature review, measured through questionnaire or test results. Path 
coefficient significance was assessed using standard bootstrapping with 10,000 subsamples (two-tailed, α = .05).
To further clarify RQ4, we conducted multiple linear regression analyses in SPSS to evaluate the predictive power of relationships 
identified as significant by the PLS-SEM analysis.
3.4.4. Quantitative rigour
Our sample size was sufficient according to rules of thumb: (a) at least 30 observation pairs for paired-sample t-tests; (b) at least ten 
times the largest number of indicators per variable for PLS-SEM; and (c) at least ten observations per predictor for multiple linear 
regressions.
The data demonstrated linearity and homoscedasticity, evidenced by the random distribution of points in scatterplots and align -
ment along the diagonal in P-P plots ( Field, 2018 ). Skewness (   1.94 to 0.83) and kurtosis (   6.81 to 1.79) values confirmed data 
normality ( Byrne, 2010 ), verifying the suitability of our data for paired-sample t-tests and multiple linear regression analyses ( Field, 
2018 ). Additionally, the data were appropriate for PLS-SEM analysis, which does not require adherence to specific distributional 
assumptions ( Hair Jr et al., 2021 ).
No issues of multicollinearity were identified, as Pearson correlation coefficients between all pairs of indicators were below 0.88, 
confirming data suitability for multiple linear regression ( Field, 2018 ).
For the PLS-SEM measurement model, we assessed validity and reliability according to Hair Jr et al. ’ s (2021) guidelines 
( Appendix C , Tables 2 – 4 ). The model exhibited strong internal consistency reliability (rho A > 0.70), adequate discriminant validity 
(HTMT < 0.90), robust convergent validity (AVE > 0.50), absence of collinearity issues (VIF < 5.00), and acceptable indicator reliability 
(most loadings exceeding 0.708). Although loadings for “ Baseline EFL speaking proficiency ” and “ Behavioural engagement ” and 
“ Cognitive engagement ” as indicators of “ Baseline learner engagement in conventional speaking practices ” were slightly low (between 
0.40 and 0.70), these indicators were retained due to the model's overall high reliability and validity.
Data analyses were independently conducted by members of the research team, resulting in excellent inter-rater reliability (Cohen's 
Kappa = 0.95). Any discrepancies were resolved through collaborative discussions.
4. Results
4.1. Learner affection in RASP
On a 10-point scale (1 = very low/negative; 10 = very high/positive), learners reported relatively high social comfort during RASP 
( M = 7.08, SD = 2.42), exceeding the baseline level ( M = 5.74, SD = 2.22); moderately high EFL speaking self-efficacy during RASP ( M 
= 6.29, SD = 1.69), above the baseline ( M = 5.09, SD = 1.63); and overall positive task perceptions towards RASP ( M = 6.39, SD =
1.99), slightly below baseline ( M = 6.67, SD = 1.54) ( Fig. 6 ).
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
13 
Paired-sample t-tests ( Table 1 ) indicated that learners ’ social comfort in RASP was significantly higher than baseline, t (38) = 3.58, 
p < .001, whereas EFL speaking self-efficacy and task perceptions did not differ significantly.
Triangulated with quantitative results, our interviews showed that most participants felt positive affection in RASP, highlighting 
improved social comfort and EFL self-efficacy. They attributed these improvements to NAO's non-judgemental attitudes and consistent 
encouragement, which alleviated their usual nervousness during speaking activities. One participant stated, “ NAO kept encouraging 
me like a friend … I felt more relaxed when speaking English to NAO. ” Additionally, interviewees reported that RASP helped them 
focus on the task, reducing concerns about personal language limitations or peer judgements. One participant remarked, “ I usually feel 
nervous about my speaking accuracy when talking in English with peers … I don't want to sound foolish. But [in RASP], I focused 
entirely on answering NAO's questions and forgot how my classmates might judge my speaking. ”
However, some students reported negative affection in RASP, mainly due to NAO's technical limitations. Several interviewees cited 
instances where NAO misrecognised their speech and led to delays or interruptions, which made them feel “ anxious ” and “ reluctant ” . 
NAO's synthesised voice also posed comprehension challenges, with some interviewees describing it as “ strange and incomprehen -
sible, ” which negatively impacted their task perceptions of RASP.
Fig. 6. Learner affection in RASP against the baselines.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
14 
4.2. Learner engagement in RASP
On a scale from 1 (very low) to 10 (very high), learners reported high behavioural engagement ( M = 7.20, SD = 1.63) and 
moderately high cognitive ( M = 6.78, SD = 1.54), emotional ( M = 6.49, SD = 2.06), and social engagement ( M = 6.10, SD = 1.93) with 
RASP ( Fig. 7 ). By comparison, baseline scores for conventional speaking practice were lower in behavioural ( M = 6.91, SD = 1.37), 
cognitive ( M = 6.50, SD = 1.32), and social engagement ( M = 5.71, SD = 1.79), but slightly higher emotional engagement ( M = 6.59, 
SD = 1.47).
Paired-sample t-tests ( Table 2 ) revealed no significant differences in learner engagement between RASP and the baseline.
Interviewees generally confirmed high engagement in RASP, often citing the perception of “ being heard and responded to. ” They 
highlighted NAO's attentiveness, timely feedback, and interactive gestures as factors that enhanced motivation and concentration. One 
participant noted, “ Usually, peers pay little attention … However, NAO listened carefully, which really encouraged me to try harder. ” 
Another interviewee commented, “ NAO is like a friend willing to listen. When NAO was looking at me and nodding, I felt I was heard 
and understood. ”
Additionally, learners expressed excitement about using NAO as a novel learning tool, with one stating, “ I've never learnt with a 
robot before, it's very exciting. ” However, most participants acknowledged that their initial interest waned after two to three sessions, 
with engagement levels “ returning to those typical of conventional speaking activities ” .
4.3. RASP outcomes in terms of EFL speaking proficiency
On a scale from 1 (minimal) to 9 (expert), learners exhibited moderately high speaking proficiency levels after RASP: coherence and 
fluency ( M = 6.58, SD = 1.05), lexical resource ( M = 6.31, SD = 0.72), grammatical range and accuracy ( M = 6.62, SD = 0.73), and 
pronunciation ( M = 6.46, SD = 0.71) ( Fig. 8 ). In comparison, baseline proficiency levels were lower: coherence and fluency ( M = 5.86, 
SD = 1.10), lexical resource ( M = 6.04, SD = 0.58), grammatical range and accuracy ( M = 5.80, SD = 0.74), and pronunciation ( M =
6.14, SD = 0.65).
Paired-sample t-tests ( Table 3 ) indicated significant improvements in EFL speaking proficiency as a result of RASP, in coherence 
and fluency ( t (47) = 6.40, p < .001), lexical resource ( t (47) = 2.72, p = .009), grammatical range and accuracy ( t (47) = 9.08, p < .001), 
and pronunciation ( t (47) = 3.67, p < .001).
Corroborating the test results, all interviewees reported improvements in their speaking proficiency, attributing these gains to the 
semi-formal, real-time interactions with NAO and the high-quality language input that NAO offered. Participants noted that NAO's 
questioning, feedback, and language delivery were “ very professional ” and “ close to authentic IELTS speaking examiners ” . The robot's 
physical presence enhanced its role as a “ real interlocutor, ” prompting learners to take practice “ more seriously ” than peer-based or 
self-regulated speaking activities. One student remarked, “ I took the practice with NAO as seriously as practicing with my English 
teacher. ”
Moreover, several participants highlighted NAO's effectiveness in conveying language knowledge, noting that its “ engaging hand 
gestures ” and “ eye contact ” made language knowledge “ memorable ” and “ easy to understand. ” However, the quality of NAO's syn -
thesised voice posed comprehension challenges, with one stating, “ Sometimes, NAO's pronunciation can be quite strange and hard to 
understand. I cannot really learn from it. ”
4.4. Interactions among learner affection, engagement, and outcome of RASP
Our PLS-SEM analysis, based on Hair Jr et al. ’ s (2021) criteria, demonstrated moderate-to-large predictive power for the proposed 
model, explaining significant variance in learner affection ( R
2 
= 0.31), engagement ( R
2 
= 0.74), and EFL speaking proficiency out -
comes ( R
2 
= 0.58) of RASP ( Fig. 9 ). Significant paths are: “ Learner affection in RASP ” to “ Learner engagement in RASP ” ( β = 0.86, t =
10.62, 95% BCCI = [0.68, 1.00], f
2 
= 1.76); “ Baseline learner affection in conventional speaking practices ” to “ Learner affection in 
RASP ” ( β = 0.55, t = 5.56, 95% BCCI = [0.35, 0.74], f
2 
= 0.44); and “ Baseline EFL speaking proficiency ” to “ Outcomes of RASP in EFL 
speaking proficiency ” ( β = 0.78, t = 11.51, 95% BCCI = [0.63, 0.90], f
2 
= 1.22). These results suggest that learners with positive 
affection in conventional speaking practices maintained favourable affection in RASP, which in turn significantly enhanced their 
engagement. Additionally, baseline proficiency levels were strong predictors of improved speaking proficiency after RASP.
To further explore the significant link between learner affection and engagement identified by PLS-SEM, we conducted multiple 
linear regressions. Results ( Appendix D ) revealed significant effects of learner affection on all four dimensions of learner engagement in 
RASP: behavioural ( R
2 
= 0.66, F (3, 39) = 25.55, p < .001), cognitive ( R
2 
= 0.59, F (3, 39) = 18.59, p < .001), emotional ( R
2 
= 0.81, F (3, 
39) = 54.72, p < .001), and social engagement ( R
2 
= 0.46, F (3, 39) = 11.02, p < .001). Power analyses conducted with G*Power 
Table 1 
Paired-sample t-tests on the differences between learner affection in RASP and the baselines.
M SD 95% CI t df Two-Sided p
Social comfort 1.23 2.16 (-1.94-, 0.53) 3.578 38 < 0.001**
EFL speaking self-efficacy 1.32 5.33 (-0.40, 3.05) 1.552 38 0.129
Task perceptions   0.37 2.29 (-1.14, 0.39)   0.990 36 0.329
** p < .001.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
15 
Fig. 7. Learner engagement in RASP against the baseline.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
16 
indicated very strong statistical power ( > 0.88), and independence of predictors was confirmed (Durbin-Watson values between 1 and 
3). Specifically ( Table 4 ), more positive task perceptions significantly predicted higher behavioural ( B = 0.57, t = 4.98, p < .001), 
cognitive ( B = 0.40, t = 3.38, p = .002), emotional ( B = 0.83, t = 7.60, p < .001), and social engagement ( B = 0.39, t = 2.27, p = .029) 
in RASP ( Fig. 10 ).
Triangulating these quantitative findings, interviewees confirmed that positive learner affection significantly enhanced their 
engagement in RASP. One interviewee commented, “ I felt relaxed and confident when practising English with NAO, so I could engage 
in the practice for longer … The dialogues with NAO closely resembled authentic IELTS speaking tests, which is very useful. So I 
worked hard in the [RASP]. ”
Notably, some interviewees reported that their improved affection in RASP positively influenced their engagement in speaking 
practice outside the classroom. One participant stated, “ I felt overall more comfortable talking with NAO than my classmates … so I 
practiced speaking harder (in RASP compared to conventional speaking practices). ” One learner noted feeling “ more comfortable and 
motivated ” to engage in peer-based EFL practice after participating in RASP.
Conflicting with the PLS-SEM results, interviewees also perceived that their enhanced affection and engagement in RASP 
contributed to speaking proficiency improvement. One participant commented, “ RASP was helpful. I concentrated deeply … I learned 
many new words and became better at generating and expressing ideas smoothly. ” However, another interviewee mentioned being 
more engaged with NAO itself than with the academic content, suggesting that high engagement might not have directly contributed to 
improvements in speaking proficiency, stating that: “ I focused on talking with NAO, not the practice. ”
5. Discussions
5.1. Learner affection in RASP
Our statistical data and interview results indicate that learners generally held positive affection in RASP, consistent with previous 
robot-assisted language learning research ( Lin et al., 2022 ; van den Berghe et al., 2019 ). Notably, learners reported significantly 
greater social comfort in RASP compared to conventional speaking practices, primarily due to RASP's more supportive and relaxed 
environment. Our interviewees appreciated NAO's non-judgemental attitudes, perceived relatedness with NAO, and described it as 
“ like a friend ” , which largely improved their affective experience during speaking practice. Our findings extend Zhang et al. (2026)
arguments for the positive impacts of non-academic socialising with learning agents on language learner affection. It also support Lee 
and Lee's (2022) argument for the usefulness of robots in enacting mental immediacy, creating supportive learning environments, and 
improving learner emotions. Based on these findings, we recommend that researchers and educators integrate robots into EFL speaking 
practices to foster supportive environments and enhance learner affection.
Moreover, our participants contributed their relaxed experiences and positive affection in RASP to NAO's immediate and positive 
feedback. Interviewees identified fear of negative evaluation as a major source of social anxiety during speaking activities. However, in 
RASP, learners felt liberated from such fears, as NAO exclusively offered encouragement and praise, leading to increased relaxation, 
confidence, and motivation. Also observed by Alemi et al. (2017) , this phenomenon aligns with self-determination theory ( Deci & 
Ryan, 2012 ), which posits that praise enhances learners' awareness of their progress and competence, thus reducing anxiety and 
improving affection. Our findings show that students value robots' feedback in speaking practices and can develop awareness of 
progress and experience reduced anxiety due to immediate and positive robot feedback. These findings indicate learners' perceptions 
of robots' social role in speaking practice, consistent with prior observations ( van den Berghe et al., 2019 ).
Another contributing factor to learners' positive affection in RASP, particularly regarding social comfort, was decreased self- 
consciousness and reduced awareness of peer judgement. Prior studies have established a negative correlation between self- 
consciousness and social comfort ( Bortolan, 2022 ; Higa et al., 2008 ). Supporting these findings, our interviewees indicated that 
negative affection in conventional speaking practices stemmed from heightened self-consciousness and concern about peer evaluation. 
In contrast, learners engaged in RASP reported diminished self-awareness, as their focus shifted entirely to skill improvement. This 
shift significantly enhanced their social comfort and overall affection. This phenomenon aligns with flow theory ( Csikszentmihalyi 
et al., 2014 ), which argues that real-time interactions and immediate feedback can induce states of intense concentration, intrinsic 
enjoyment, reduced self-consciousness, and diminished awareness of distractions, such as peer judgement, in learning. It is possible 
that robots trigger learners ’ flow states in RASP, decrease their self-consciousness and awareness of peer judgement, and thereby 
improve their affection. So far, analysis of robot-assisted language learning from the perspective of the flow theory remains limited, 
which appears a promising direction for future research.
Despite these positive aspects, we found no statistically significant differences between RASP and conventional speaking practices 
concerning task perceptions and EFL speaking self-efficacy. The significant relationship identified by our PLS-SEM analysis between 
Table 2 
Paired-sample t-tests on the differences between learner engagement in RASP and the baselines.
M SD 95% CI t df Two-Sided p
Behavioural engagement 0.29 1.81 (-0.31, 0.89) 0.969 36 0.339
Cognitive engagement 0.33 1.64 (-0.21, 0.88) 1.239 36 0.223
Emotional engagement   0.12 1.94 (-0.76, 0.53)   0.367 36 0.716
Social engagement 0.34 1.87 (-0.28, 0.97) 1.111 36 0.274
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
17 
Fig. 8. RASP outcomes in terms of EFL speaking proficiency compared against their baselines.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
18 
baseline affection in conventional speaking practices and affection in RASP suggests the stability of language learners' affection across 
different contexts, echoing Zhang et al. ’ s (2024) observations regarding null results in technology-enhanced language learning 
research. Furthermore, technical limitations of NAO, such as inadequate speech recognition and low-quality synthesised voice, 
negatively affected learners' experiences and affection in RASP, corroborating Lin et al. ’ s (2022) findings. Thus, future RASP imple -
mentations should consider improved speech recognition technology and voice quality to enhance learner affection.
5.2. Learner engagement in RASP
Our data and interview findings validate the high learner engagement with RASP, particularly in terms of behavioural engagement, 
aligning with earlier robot-assisted language learning research ( Lee & Lee, 2022 ; Randall, 2019 ). A significant factor driving this 
engagement was learners ’ initial curiosity and interest in novel learning technologies, supporting intrinsic motivation theory ( Deci & 
Ryan, 2013 ), which posits that engagement increases when driven by internal factors like curiosity. However, we also observed a sharp 
decline in curiosity and interest after two to three sessions as familiarity with the technology increased, providing empirical support for 
previously reported novelty effects in robot-assisted language learning ( van den Berghe et al., 2019 ).
Another contributor to high engagement was learners' perception of being heard and valued in RASP. Interviewees reported that 
Table 3 
Paired-sample t-tests on the differences between RASP outcomes and learner baselines in terms of EFL speaking proficiency.
M SD 95% CI t df Two-Sided p
Coherence and fluency   0.75 0.81 (0.51, 0.99) 6.398 47 < 0.001**
Lexical resource   0.29 0.74 (0.08, 0.51) 2.721 47 0.009*
Grammatical range and accuracy   0.85 0.65 (0.67, 1.04) 9.077 47 < 0.001**
Pronunciation   0.33 0.63 (0.15, 0.52) 3.665 47 < 0.001**
* p < .05; ** p < .001.
Fig. 9. Summary of the working model.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
19 
NAO actively listened to their responses and provided immediate, multimodal feedback through gestures, voice, and body language. 
Such responsive interactions fostered a sense of being understood and valued, an experience rarely found in conventional self- 
regulated or peer-based speaking practices, enhancing learner engagement, as admitted by our interviewees. These findings reso -
nate with the person-centred approach ( Greene, 2017 ), which emphasises the importance of learners feeling valued as a key driver of 
motivation and engagement. This phenomenon can also be explained through Self-Determination Theory ( Deci & Ryan, 2012 ), which 
emphasises that fulfilling learners ’ basic psychological needs, autonomy, competence, and relatedness, enhances intrinsic motivation 
and engagement. Feeling valued and heard satisfies the need for relatedness and supports autonomy, fostering ownership and 
accountability. Consequently, students become more committed to their learning goals, as they perceive their contributions as 
meaningful and their learning as personally relevant. Thus, our study demonstrates that RASP can effectively engage learners by 
fostering a sense of recognition and accountability.
However, our analysis revealed no statistically significant differences between RASP and conventional speaking practices in terms 
of learner engagement, contradicting some robot-assisted language learning studies (e.g., Shin & Shin, 2015 ). One possible explanation 
is that in our study, although NAO emulated face-to-face speaking practice using rich body movements and gestures, it did not trigger 
learners to use body movements and gestures as well. Instead, most of our learners remained largely still during RASP. Hence, unable 
to trigger their bodily actions sufficiently, NAO may not enable deep cognitive engagement, according to the embodied learning theory 
( Khazaie & Derakhshan, 2024 ; Pruss, 2022 ). So far, research in this direction remains limited. We call for further research into 
strategies for eliciting greater learner bodily engagement in RASP.
Another possible explanation for the insignificant differences in learner engagement lies in the distinct mechanisms underlying 
engagement in RASP versus conventional speaking practices. Our PLS-SEM results indicated no significant influence of learner 
engagement in conventional speaking practices on engagement in RASP, suggesting that learners engage through different 
Table 4 
Parameter estimates of the relationships between learner affection and engagement in RASP.
Models B SE ( B ) β t Sig.
Predictors Outcomes
(Constant) Behavioural engagement in RASP 4.124 0.943 ​ 4.371 < 0.001**
Social comfort in RASP   0.130 0.078   0.194   1.666 0.104
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP   0.007 0.132   0.007   0.055 0.957
Task perceptions in RASP 0.569 0.114 0.694 4.981 < 0.001**
(Constant) Cognitive engagement in RASP 3.466 0.986 ​ 3.514 0.001*
Social comfort in RASP   0.094 0.082   0.148   1.149 0.257
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP 0.174 0.138 0.191 1.267 0.213
Task perceptions in RASP 0.404 0.119 0.520 3.384 0.002*
(Constant) Emotional engagement in RASP 1.589 0.900 ​ 1.765 0.085
Social comfort in RASP   0.124 0.075   0.146   1.667 0.104
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP 0.015 0.126 0.013 0.122 0.904
Task perceptions in RASP 0.829 0.109 0.798 7.600 < 0.001**
(Constant) Social engagement in RASP 2.418 1.416 ​ 1.708 0.096
Social comfort in RASP   0.111 0.117   0.140   0.947 0.350
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP 0.259 0.198 0.227 1.312 0.197
Task perceptions in RASP 0.390 0.171 0.401 2.273 0.029*
* p < .05; ** p < .001.
Fig. 10. Impacts of task perceptions of RASP on learner engagement in RASP.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
20 
mechanisms in RASP compared to traditional activities. This phenomenon was noted by Zhang et al. (2024) who argued against 
analysing learner engagement and behaviours in different learning settings in the same way. Given that no prior research has explicitly 
investigated these distinct engagement patterns, this area merits further exploration.
5.3. RASP outcomes in terms of EFL speaking proficiency
Our quantitative results and interview data demonstrate significant improvements in learners' EFL speaking outcomes after RASP, 
even when controlling for baseline proficiency. These findings align with previous research ( Lin et al., 2022 ), providing empirical 
support for the effectiveness of RASP. Interviewees attributed this effectiveness to NAO's role as a professional interlocutor, a role often 
absent in conventional speaking practices. NAO was perceived as a professional interlocutor “like a real English tutor.” Interacting with 
NAO, learners perceived a strong sense of authenticity and formality of the speaking practice, which motivated increased effort and 
persistence. These findings echo Lee et al. (2011) . Our results also support previous insights regarding learners anthropomorphising 
robots and assigning them social roles in educational contexts ( van den Berghe et al., 2019 ). Furthermore, our study aligns with the 
sociocultural theory ( Vygotsky, 1978 ), which highlights the importance of communication with an attentive, professional interlocutor 
for enhancing language learning outcomes.
Additionally, NAO's multimodal approach to knowledge delivery contributed to improved speaking proficiency. Interviewees 
found NAO's vivid presentation of language knowledge, through gestures, body movements, and voice, effective for language 
acquisition. This finding corroborates previous studies highlighting educational robots' ability to give linguistic scaffolding effectively 
via multisensory communications ( Lin et al., 2022 ; Randall, 2019 ). Hence, our study reinforces the pedagogical advantages of robots in 
language education ( Lee & Lee, 2022 ).
5.4. Interplay among learner affection, engagement, and outcome of RASP
Our PLS-SEM analysis reveals significant positive effects of learners’ affection, particularly task perceptions, on their engagement in 
RASP. Interview data corroborate these findings, reinforcing expectancy-value theory ( Wigfield & Eccles, 2000 ) and the theory of 
planned behaviour ( Ajzen, 2005 ). They also extend the affective filter theory and prior research on the positive influence of learner 
affection in EFL speaking education ( Nagle, 2021 ) to robot-assisted contexts. Future research aimed at enhancing learner engagement 
in RASP may focus on improving affection in this learning approach.
However, not all findings are in line with previous EFL speaking studies (e.g., Zeinivand et al., 2015 ). Our PLS-SEM analysis showed 
no significant impact of learner affection and engagement in RASP on EFL speaking outcomes. This may be because learners, enjoying 
high social comfort, became engrossed in entertaining social interactions with the robot and peers, paying insufficient attention to 
linguistic development. Our interview data support this, with some participants admitting they focused more on interacting with NAO 
rather than on language learning in RASP. Also observed in previous technology-enhanced language learning studies ( Ke et al., 2016 ; 
Philp et al., 2010 ; Zhang et al., 2024 ), such misalignment of learner attention and interest with their academic goals can lead to limited 
language learning progress, despite learners’ positive affection and deep engagement in the practice. Hence, future RASP practitioners 
should carefully monitor whether engaged learners focus on language development or become distracted by social interactions, to 
ensure effective implementation.
Another possible explanation is the discrepancy between learners’ self-reported and actual engagement. Heemskerk and Malmberg 
(2020) found that students often underestimated their engagement in self-report surveys, particularly their cognitive and behavioural 
engagement. Similarly, our participants might have inaccurately assessed their own engagement on questionnaires, potentially leading 
to the statistically insignificant relationships. Future research should adopt mixed-methods approaches for a more comprehensive 
evaluation of learner engagement in RASP.
Moreover, learners’ improved affection in RASP may have indirectly improved speaking proficiency by increasing engagement in 
speaking practice beyond RASP. Our quantitative and qualitative data revealed that after experiencing RASP, our learners had better 
affection and deeper engagement in self-regulated and peer-based speaking practice outside class. Such extracurricular engagement 
may have contributed more to EFL speaking development than the eight-session RASP intervention, potentially explaining the 
insignificant direct effect of learner affection and engagement in RASP on speaking outcomes. Therefore, future studies should 
consider learner affection and engagement in out-of-class speaking activities to better understand their impact on RASP outcomes.
6. Implications
Our study contributes to the theories of robot-assisted language learning in several respects. First, our RASP targets speaking 
proficiency development among intermediate-level young adults in higher education and demonstrates overall effectiveness. Although 
earlier research reported mixed results regarding robots' effectiveness in developing speaking skills ( Lee & Lee, 2022 ) and suggested 
younger learners benefit more from robot-assisted language learning than adults ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ), our study provides 
quantitative and qualitative evidence for robots’ significant effectiveness in improving speaking proficiency among adult learners, 
even after controlling for the novelty effect and baseline factors. Our findings also indicate that RASP may enhance learner affection 
and engagement in extracurricular speaking practices, both self-regulated and peer-based, potentially supporting long-term EFL 
speaking development. Hence, educators are recommended to implement RASP to improve EFL speaking skills in the long term among 
adult learners at the higher educational level.
Second, we found a limited impact of RASP on learner affection and engagement, contrary to prior claims ( Derakhshan et al., 2024 ; 
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
21 
Randall, 2019 ). By examining RASP dynamics through both objective and subjective measures, we found that learner affection and 
engagement across multiple dimensions initially increased, then declined before stabilising. Notably, emotional engagement exhibited 
a slight decrease over the course of RASP, likely due to the diminishing novelty effect after two to three sessions. We also identified the 
hard-to-change nature of learner characteristics and learners ’ insufficient bodily actions in RASP, which further constrained the 
positive effects of this learning method on affection and engagement. Our findings underscore the complex, multidimensional, and 
dynamic nature of learner affection and engagement within robot-assisted language learning contexts, which future research should 
carefully consider. Based on these insights, we also recommend that educators pay particular attention to fostering and sustaining 
learner affection and engagement when implementing RASP.
Third, our study underscores the usefulness of activity theory in analysing RASP. Through this theoretical lens, we identified the 
dynamic between learners ( Subject ), the speaking practice task ( Object ), and robot and peer interlocutors ( Community ). We illuminate 
variations in learner affection across different elements of RASP. We found that robot assistance can substantially enhance learner 
affection towards interlocutors in speaking activities ( Community ), while learners' affection towards themselves ( Subject ) and the 
practice task ( Object ) remained relatively stable. Building on these findings, educators may consider employing RASP to engage 
learners with high social anxiety in speaking practice. Our results thus support Lin et al. ’ s (2022) argument for the high adaptability of 
robot-assisted learning across diverse language learning theories. With reference to our conceptual framework, researchers are 
encouraged to leverage activity theory further to explore aspects such as learner engagement with various elements of RASP. It is 
important to note that our study focuses primarily on the three central elements of activity theory, Subject , Object , and Community , 
while the expanded versions of the theory comprise a more complex, dynamic network that includes additional elements, such as 
artefacts, rules, and division of labour ( Engestr ¨om, 2001b ). Future research could further refine our conceptual framework of RASP 
and extend the analysis by incorporating these additional elements, thereby achieving a more comprehensive understanding of this 
learning approach.
Our study has also provided rich practical implications by illuminating robots' strong potential as qualified interlocutors in 
speaking practice, a role that is crucial yet often insufficiently fulfilled in real-life EFL settings ( Bailey, 2003 ). With voice synthesis and 
recognition systems, robot interlocutors can assign academic tasks, ask questions, provide feedback, and deliver linguistic scaffolding, 
aligning with prior expectations regarding educational robots' potentials ( Deng et al., 2024 ; Lin et al., 2022 ). Compared to other 
technologies like multimedia, animated characters, and chatbots, robots, particularly anthropomorphic ones like NAO, afford the 
physical presence and non-verbal, multisensory communicative cues, thereby having more capability of emulating human face-to-face 
interactions and adopting natural social roles ( van den Berghe et al., 2019 ). These features may lead learners to experience a stronger 
sense of “ real ” with robot interlocutors, as reflected in interviewees ’ descriptions of NAO as “ like a friend ” and “ close to authentic 
IELTS speaking examiners. ” Consequently, robot interlocutors can create a strong sense of authenticity in speaking practice ( van den 
Berghe et al., 2019 ), which is essential for the practice effectiveness in developing speaking proficiency ( Lin et al., 2022 ). Therefore, 
robots may be more useful than other technologies in serving as the interlocutor in speaking practice, contributing to better EFL 
speaking development.
Robot interlocutors also hold some advantages over human interlocutors in speaking practice. At the linguistic level, robot in -
terlocutors are perceived as “ very professional ” for offering high-quality language input via feedback and scaffolding, according to our 
interview results. Such high-quality language input is the prerequisite for effective speaking practice, aligning with Schmidt's (2012)
and Ellis's (2019) argument. Hence, compared to peer interlocutors who generally lack language proficiency ( Dao, 2020 ), robot in -
terlocutors appear better in facilitating EFL speaking development. At the emotional level, our finding showed robot interlocutors' 
usefulness in bridging mental and physical immediacy with learners, creating a comfortable, supportive environment for speaking 
practice, and thus improving learner affection and engagement, consistent with previous arguments ( Lee & Lee, 2022 ; Randall, 2019 ). 
In contrast, peer interlocutors and teacher interlocutors can cause strong self-awareness and anxiety about judgement and negative 
feedback in learners, thus reducing learner affection and engagement in speaking practice ( Archbell & Coplan, 2022 ). Therefore, robot 
interlocutors may foster greater learner affection and engagement compared to peer or teacher interlocutors, a distinction that is 
especially significant given the crucial role of positive affect ( Mahripah, 2013 ) and deep engagement ( Ding & Zhu, 2025 ) in effective 
EFL speaking practice.
Nonetheless, robot interlocutors remain far from perfect. Our interviews revealed NAO's inadequate speech recognition and low- 
quality synthesised voice, which negatively impacted learners' experiences and affection towards RASP. NAO's limited speech 
recognition also hampers its ability to identify and correct learners' speech errors, a critical function in speaking education 
( Gumbaridze, 2013 ). NAO ’ low-quality synthesised voice may reinforce mispronunciations and hinder language comprehension ( In & 
Han, 2015 ). Such technical limitations likely constrained RASP's effectiveness in developing EFL speaking proficiency. As inadequate 
speech recognition and low-quality synthesised voice are common issues among educational robots ( Lin et al., 2022 ), our findings 
regarding NAO's limitations may generalise across RASP contexts and robot types. Future practitioners should take these constraints 
into consideration. To address the limitations, we suggest employing an advanced speech recognition system and AI-generated robot 
voices to enhance learners' experiences and efficiency in RASP.
Moreover, our interviewees reported difficulties processing language knowledge alongside real-time interactions with the robot 
interlocutor in RASP, a phenomenon frequently observed in EFL speaking practice ( Gomez, 2021 ). Providing knowledge notes out -
lining key language concepts during RASP may help address the problem, which can scaffold learners during speaking practice and 
serve as takeaways for further study ( Mirahmadi & Alavi, 2016 ). Hence, we recommend that educators provide EFL learners with 
knowledge notes during RASP, allowing learners to review and process new language knowledge at their own pace and enhancing both 
the efficiency and effectiveness of RASP.
Overall, our study demonstrates the significant effectiveness of robots as interlocutors in supporting EFL speaking practice, 
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
22 
surpassing other technologies and human interlocutors, and highlights their considerable potential in language education more 
broadly. In light of the urgent global challenge of teacher shortages ( Symeonidis et al., 2025 ), we recommend that policymakers 
endorse the integration of robotics and related educational tools and materials into language curricula as a viable solution. To 
maximise the efficiency of RASP and other robot-assisted learning implementations, we further advise the inclusion of professional 
development programmes that prepare language teachers to effectively design, implement, and manage robot-assisted learning en -
vironments. Additionally, we suggest prioritising funding for advanced educational robots equipped with features such as high-quality 
voice synthesis and speech recognition, which may further enhance the effectiveness of RASP and similar applications, in line with Lin 
et al.’s (2022) recommendations.
7. Conclusions and limitations
This study proposed a RASP framework grounded in activity theory, the affective filter theory, embodied learning theory, 
expectancy-value theory, the noticing hypothesis, and engagement theories. We investigated the process and effects of this learning 
method using a mixed-methods approach. Findings revealed positive learner affection, deep engagement, and satisfactory EFL 
speaking proficiency outcomes of RASP. While affection significantly enhanced engagement, neither affection nor engagement had a 
statistically significant impact on learning outcomes. These findings were interpreted through self-determination theory, flow theory, 
sociocultural theory, person-centred learning theory, and expectancy-value theory.
Despite triangulation of subjective and objective data, our findings may not be generalised across samples. This study examined a 
single cohort of Chinese EFL students from one higher educational institution who had overall intermediate language proficiency and 
experience with conventional EFL speaking practice and technology-enhanced learning but no prior exposure to robot-assisted lan -
guage. This highly homogeneous cohort, although reflective of learners sharing comparable backgrounds, restricted the examination 
of factors such as target language, digital literacy, prior training, educational history, and cultural identity. These factors may influence 
the experiences and outcomes of RASP, as individuals’ situational, developmental, and cultural contexts play a considerable role in 
language learning processes ( Horwitz, 1999 ). For instance, our participants demonstrated upper-intermediate levels of engagement in 
RASP, not significantly differing from that in conventional speaking practice. This finding may not be extended to elementary and 
secondary EFL education since younger students generally exhibit greater willingness to engage with robot-assisted learning ( Randall, 
2019 ). Additionally, students with different sociocultural backgrounds may adhere to different social norms, resulting in varied levels 
and forms of engagement in RASP. Researchers observed that compared to those with western cultural backgrounds, Chinese EFL 
students tend to speak less and initiate conversations less frequently in interactions ( Li & Jia, 2006 ; Zheng, 2021 ). By this logic, 
learners with western cultural backgrounds may have deeper engagement in RASP than our participants. To deepen the understanding 
of RASP and broaden the scope of research in this area, future studies should consider a larger, more diverse population with various 
situational, developmental, and cultural backgrounds when investigating learner affection, engagement, and outcomes of RASP.
Researchers and educators may also be particularly mindful of robot types when applying our findings. Drawing on the literature (e. 
g., Randall, 2019 ; Shin & Shin, 2015 ), we selected the NAO robot for our study due to its capabilities in physical interactions and 
non-verbal social cues, which closely align with the requirements of our RASP framework. However, given the considerable variation 
in design and functionality among different robot models ( Randall, 2019 ), our results may not be directly generalisable to RASP 
implementations involving other robots. For instance, interviews revealed that some students reported increased engagement through 
eye contact with NAO, a feature absent in certain robots such as Scribble, which lack LED eye-gaze capabilities. Consequently, RASP 
implementations utilising robots without such eye-gaze functionality may not elicit the same level of learner engagement observed 
with NAO. Moreover, NAO's programming environment, Choregraphe, does not support adaptive feedback or personalised learning 
pathways, whereas other platforms, such as the pocket robot partner described by Yorita et al. (2013) , offer these advanced func -
tionalities. Considering the documented benefits of adaptive feedback and personalised learning in enhancing the efficacy of 
robot-assisted language learning ( Randall, 2019 ), RASP implementations using robots with these capabilities may yield superior EFL 
speaking outcomes compared to NAO-based interventions. Similarly, recent advancements have seen an increasing number of 
educational robots equipped to recognise learner behaviours and emotions and respond with appropriate feedback ( Schiavo et al., 
2024 ; Zhao et al., 2025 ), features beyond the current scope of NAO. Given the significant impact of behaviour and emotion recognition 
on improving learner affection in EFL speaking practice ( Chen & Lee, 2011 ), this limitation may have constrained the effectiveness of 
RASP in our study. Future research should explore RASP employing diverse robot types and systematically compare their effectiveness 
to deepen understanding of this learning approach and improve its generalisability across varied technological contexts.
Our study has limitations. First, it focused solely on EFL speaking proficiency as the outcome of RASP, while other skills and 
knowledge may also be developed. Interviewees reported improvements in idea generation and organisation from RASP, which 
warrant further exploration in future studies. Second, we relied heavily on self-reported data for learner affection and engagement. 
While valuable, objective measures such as structured observations ( Heemskerk & Malmberg, 2020 ) or eye-tracking data ( Zhang et al., 
2025a ) could provide a more comprehensive understanding. Future research should integrate both self-reported and objective data in 
exploring learner affection and engagement in RASP.
Robot-assisted learning is gaining popularity across disciplines. This study explored the use of robots in developing EFL speaking 
among undergraduates, offering insights into its potential in language education and beyond. To further unlock the capabilities of this 
learning method, we encourage research integrating various state-of-the-art technologies into robot-assisted learning of EFL speaking. 
For example, adaptive feedback and personalised learning pathways, features not supported by NAO's official software in our study, 
may enhance the effectiveness of robot-assisted learning ( Randall, 2019 ). Future research could further investigate the potential of 
RASP by incorporating these functionalities into robot-assisted language learning. Additionally, Khazaie and Derakhshan (2024)
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
23 
integrated augmented reality technology into robot-assisted learning of EFL listening and reading, enabling learners to visualise an 
educational robot in various medical scenarios via mobile devices. Their results showed that the integration of augmented reality 
improved the effectiveness of robot-assisted language learning by enhancing students' comprehension. This impact may be extended to 
EFL speaking development. Artificial intelligence technology also appears promising in this direction. For example, Derakhshan et al. 
(2025) incorporated Artificial intelligence technology into robot-assisted learning of EFL speaking for medical purposes, where 
Artificial Intelligence analysed and evaluated students' speaking quality and directed robot responses. Considering the great potential 
of Artificial intelligence technology, future research may further leverage it, for instance, by generating personalised conversational 
content for real-time, free-flow learner-robot interactions.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Ruofei Zhang: Writing – original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Di Zou: 
Writing – review & editing, Validation, Supervision, Methodology, Conceptualization. Haoran Xie: Validation, Supervision, Software, 
Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Conceptualization. Gary Cheng: Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Software, 
Resources, Project administration.
Ethics declarations
I confirm that all the research meets ethical guidelines and adheres to the legal requirements of the study country.
Declaration of generative AI generative-ai
Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies (ChatGPT) have only been used to check the grammar of the manuscript.
Funding
The research was conducted without any external funding or financial support.
Conflict of interest
None.
Appendix A. Learner affection in RASP
To what extent do the following statements reflect your actual situation? 
Please rate them on a scale from 1 to 10: 
1 = Completely untrue, not related to me at all 
10 = Completely true, exactly like me
Social comfort (adapted from Connor et al., 2001 )
1. In RASP, fear of embarrassment causes me to avoid interacting with classmates.* [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
2. In RASP, I avoid to be the center of attention.* [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
3. In RASP, being embarrassed or looking stupid are among my worst fears.* [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
EFL speaking self-efficacy (adapted from Gan et al., 2022 )
4. I can speak English fluently. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
5. I can communicate with NAO and classmates in English. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
6. I can try to keep a high level of self-confidence in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
7. I can understand and participate in the most complex, difficult questions in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
8. I can understand the most complex, difficult speech by my classmates and NAO in speaking practices. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
9. I can master the speaking skills and language knowledge learned and practiced in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
10. I can NOT use the speaking skills and language knowledge learned and practiced in RASP for real-life or authentic IELTS 
tests.*
[1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
11. I can do very well in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
( continued on next page )
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
24 
( continued )
To what extent do the following statements reflect your actual situation? 
Please rate them on a scale from 1 to 10: 
1 = Completely untrue, not related to me at all 
10 = Completely true, exactly like me
12. I can do a good job of participating in RASP fully in English. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
Task perceptions (adapted from Ghani et al., 2019 )
13. Developing English proficiency through RASP is a good idea. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
14. I feel positive towards RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
15. I believe that RASP help me to be more engaged in developing English proficiency. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
16. I generally favour RASP for developing English proficiency. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
17. I believe that it is a good idea for me to have RASP for my future English study. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] 
[10]
* Reversed item.
Appendix B. Learner engagement in RASP
To what extent do the following statements reflect your actual situation? 
Please rate them on a scale from 1 to 10: 
1 = Completely untrue, not related to me at all 
10 = Completely true, exactly like me
Behavioural engagement (adapted from Skinner et al., 2009 )
1. In RASP, I engage in each question very carefully. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
2. I try hard to speak well in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
3. In RASP, I DON ’ T work as hard as I can.* [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
Cognitive engagement (adapted from Skinner et al., 2009 )
4. I try to make different knowledge points and speaking strategies fit together and use them in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
5. I try to relate new language skills and knowledge to what I already know and use them in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
6. In RASP, I make up my own example answers to help me master important speaking skills and knowledge points. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
Emotional engagement (adapted from Deng et al., 2020 )
7. I was inspired to further develop my English proficiency in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
8. I found RASP interesting. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
9. I enjoyed learning, speaking, and listening English in RASP. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
Social engagement (adapted from Deng et al., 2020 )
10. I often responded to my classmates and NAO in EFL speaking practices. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
11. In RASP, I regularly discuss with my classmates on knowledge points and speaking skills. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
12. In RASP, I shared learning materials (e.g., notes, vocabulary definitions, grammar knowledge) with my classmates. [1] [2] [3] [4] [5] [6] [7] [8] [9] [10]
*Reversed item.
Appendix C. Indicators of the validity and reliability of the PLS-SEM analysis
Table 1 
Measurement of RASP model
Level one Level two Measures
Learner affection in RASP Social comfort in RASP Post-questionnaire results on “ Social comfort ”
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP Post-questionnaire results on “ EFL speaking 
self-efficacy ”
Task perceptions in RASP Post-questionnaire results on “ Task 
perceptions ”
Learner engagement in RASP Behavioural engagement in RASP Post-questionnaire results on “ Behavioural 
engagement ”
Cognitive engagement in RASP Post-questionnaire results on “ Cognitive 
engagement ”
Emotional engagement in RASP Post-questionnaire results on “ Emotional 
engagement ”
Social engagement in RASP Post-questionnaire results on “ Social 
engagement ”
( continued on next page )
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
25 
Table 1 ( continued )
Level one Level two Measures
Learning outcomes of RASP in EFL speaking 
proficiency
Coherence and fluency after RASP Post-test results on “ Coherence and fluency ”
Lexical resource after RASP Post-test results on “ Lexical resource ”
Grammatical range and accuracy after RASP Post-test results on “ Grammatical range and 
accuracy ”
Pronunciation after RASP Post-test results on “ Pronunciation ”
Baseline learner affection in conventional speaking 
practices
Baseline social comfort in conventional speaking 
practices
Pre-questionnaire results on “ Social comfort ”
Baseline EFL speaking self-efficacy in conventional 
speaking practices
Pre-questionnaire results on “ EFL speaking 
self-efficacy ”
Baseline task perceptions in conventional speaking 
practices
Pre-questionnaire results on “ Task 
perceptions ”
Baseline learner engagement in conventional 
speaking practices
Baseline behavioural engagement in conventional 
speaking practices
Pre-questionnaire results on “ Behavioural 
engagement ”
Baseline cognitive engagement in conventional speaking 
practices
Pre-questionnaire results on “ Cognitive 
engagement ”
Baseline emotional engagement in conventional 
speaking practices
Pre-questionnaire results on “ Emotional 
engagement ”
Baseline social engagement in conventional speaking 
practices
Pre-questionnaire results on “ Social 
engagement ”
Baseline EFL speaking proficiency Baseline coherence and fluency Pre-test results on “ Coherence and fluency ”
Baseline lexical resource Pre-test results on “ Lexical resource ”
Baseline grammatical range and accuracy Pre-test results on “ Grammatical range and 
accuracy ”
Baseline pronunciation Pre-test results on “ Pronunciation ”
Table 2 
Indicators for the reliability and validity of the PLS-SEM measurement model
Variables Indicators Factor 
loadings
rhoA AVE
Learning outcomes of RASP in EFL speaking proficiency Coherence and fluency after RASP 0.820 0.857 0.689
Lexical resource after RASP 0.842
Grammatical range and accuracy after RASP 0.843
Pronunciation after RASP 0.816
Learner affection in RASP Social comfort in RASP 0.813 0.826 0.739
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP 0.872
Task perceptions in RASP 0.892
Learner engagement in RASP Behavioural engagement in RASP 0.867 0.915 0.783
Cognitive engagement in RASP 0.904
Emotional engagement in RASP 0.927
Social engagement in RASP 0.840
Baseline EFL speaking proficiency Baseline coherence and fluency 0.804 0.820 0.601
Baseline lexical resource 0.688
Baseline grammatical range and accuracy 0.877
Baseline pronunciation 0.720
Baseline learner affection in conventional speaking 
practices
Baseline social comfort in conventional speaking practices   0.756 0.780 0.534
Baseline EFL speaking self-efficacy in conventional speaking 
practices
0.434
Baseline task perceptions in conventional speaking practices 0.712
Baseline learner engagement in conventional speaking 
practices
Baseline behavioural engagement in conventional speaking 
practices
0.554 0.802 0.609
Baseline cognitive engagement in conventional speaking 
practices
0.463
Baseline emotional engagement in conventional speaking 
practices
0.763
Baseline social engagement in conventional speaking practices 0.757
Table 3 
The heterotrait-monotrait ratio of correlations (HTMT) indicating the discriminant validity of the measurement models of PLS-SEM (to be continued)
Learning outcomes of 
RASP in EFL speaking 
proficiency
Baseline learner 
engagement in 
conventional speaking 
practices
Learner 
engagement in 
RASP
Baseline EFL 
speaking 
proficiency
Baseline learner affection 
in conventional speaking 
practices
Learning outcomes of RASP 
in EFL speaking 
proficiency
. ​ ​ ​ ​
Baseline learner 
engagement in 
0.747 . ​ ​ ​
( continued on next page )
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
26 
Table 3 ( continued )
Learning outcomes of 
RASP in EFL speaking 
proficiency 
Baseline learner 
engagement in 
conventional speaking 
practices 
Learner 
engagement in 
RASP 
Baseline EFL 
speaking 
proficiency 
Baseline learner affection 
in conventional speaking 
practices
conventional speaking 
practices
Learner engagement in 
RASP
0.887 0.606 . ​ ​
Baseline EFL speaking 
proficiency
0.376 0.345 0.193 . ​
Baseline learner affection in 
conventional speaking 
practices
0.795 0.828 0.732 0.322 .
Learning outcomes of RASP 
in EFL speaking 
proficiency
0.229 0.353 0.091 0.880 0.359
Table 4 
Variance inflation factors (VIF) indicating the collinearity of the PLS-SEM structural model
Predictors Outcomes
Learner engagement in 
RASP
Learning outcomes of RASP in EFL speaking 
proficiency
Learner affection in 
RASP
Learner affection in RASP 1.543 4.201 n/a
Baseline learner engagement in conventional speaking 
practices
1.543 n/a n/a
Learner engagement in RASP n/a 4.033 n/a
Baseline EFL speaking proficiency n/a 1.099 n/a
Baseline learner affection in conventional speaking 
practices
n/a n/a 1.003
Appendix D. Model estimates of multiple regression
Table 1 
Estimates of the model from learner affection in learner engagement in RASP
Models R
2
R
2
change
F
change
Sig. F
change
Durbin-Watson
Predictors Outcomes
Social comfort in RASP Behavioural engagement in RASP 0.663 0.663 25.547 < 0.001** 1.767
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP
Task perceptions in RASP
Social comfort in RASP Cognitive engagement in RASP 0.589 0.589 18.593 < 0.001** 2.109
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP
Task perceptions in RASP
Social comfort in RASP Emotional engagement in RASP 0.808 0.808 54.718 < 0.001** 2.380
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP
Task perceptions in RASP
Social comfort in RASP Social engagement in RASP 0.459 0.459 11.018 < 0.001** 2.549
EFL speaking self-efficacy in RASP
Task perceptions in RASP
** p < .001.
Data availability
The participants of this study did not give written consent for their data to be shared publicly, so due to the sensitive nature of the 
research supporting data is not available.
References
Ajzen, I. (2005). Affections, personality and behaviour . UK: McGraw-hill education . 
Alemi, M., Meghdari, A., & Ghazisaedy, M. (2015). The impact of social robotics on L2 learners' anxiety and attitude in English vocabulary acquisition. International 
Journal of Social Robotics, 7 , 523 – 535. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-015-0286-y
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
27 
Alemi, M., Meghdari, A., & Haeri, N. S. (2017). Young EFL learners' attitude towards RALL: An observational study focusing on motivation, anxiety, and interaction. In 
International conference on social robotics (pp. 252 – 261). Cham: Springer International Publishing . 
Amoah, S., & Yeboah, J. (2021). The speaking difficulties of Chinese EFL learners and their motivation towards speaking the English language. Journal of Language and 
Linguistic Studies, 17 (1), 56 – 69. https://search.informit.org/doi/abs/10.3316/informit.220198786765725 .
Anttila, E.. The potential of dance as embodied learning. https://escholarship.org/uc/item/3s7118mr .
Anttila, E., & Svendler Nielsen, C. (2019). Dance and the quality of life at schools: A Nordic affiliation. In K. Bond (Ed.), Dance and the quality of life (pp. 327 – 346). 
Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3319-95699-2_19 . 
Archbell, K. A., & Coplan, R. J. (2022). Too anxious to talk: Social anxiety, academic communication, and students' experiences in higher education. Journal of 
Emotional and Behavioral Disorders, 30 (4), 273 – 286. https://doi.org/10.1177/10634266211060079
Atman Uslu, N., Yavuz, G.
¨
O., & Koçak Usluel, Y. (2023). A systematic review study on educational robotics and robots. Interactive Learning Environments, 31 (9), 
5874 – 5898. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.2023890
Aubrey, S., King, J., & Almukhaild, H. (2022). Language learner engagement during speaking tasks: A longitudinal study. RELC Journal, 53 (3), 519 – 533. https://doi. 
org/10.1177/0033688220945418
Bailey, K. M. (2003). Speaking. In D. Nunan (Ed.), Practical English language teaching (pp. 47 – 66). McGraw-Hill/Contemporary . 
Banli, S. (2020). How to handle with EFL learners' negative attitudes towards speaking English. Focus on ELT Journal, 2 (2), 30 – 40. https://doi.org/10.14744/ 
felt.2020.00028
Bortolan, A. (2022). Social anxiety, self-consciousness, and interpersonal experience. Empathy, Intersubjectivity, and the Social World: The Continued Relevance of 
Phenomenology. Essays in Honour of Dermot Moran, 9 , 303. https://doi.org/10.1515/9783110698787-016
Brown, G., & Yule, G. (1983). Teaching the spoken language, 2 . Cambridge university press . 
Byrne, B. M. (2010). Structural equation modeling with AMOS: Basic concepts, applications, and programming (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum . 
Chen, Z. (2025). What shapes communicative adequacy in second language speaking performance? The contributions of complexity, accuracy, fluency, and 
pronunciation. Vigo International Journal of Applied Linguistics , (22), 65 – 90. https://doi.org/10.35869/vial.v0i22.4882
Chen, C. M., & Lee, T. H. (2011). Emotion recognition and communication for reducing second-language speaking anxiety in a web-based one-to-one synchronous 
learning environment. British Journal of Educational Technology, 42 (3), 417 – 440. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8535.2009.01035.x
Connor, K. M., Kobak, K. A., Churchill, L. E., Katzelnick, D., & Davidson, J. R. (2001). Mini-SPIN: A brief screening assessment for generalized social anxiety disorder. 
Depression and Anxiety, 14 (2), 137 – 140. https://doi.org/10.1002/da.1055
Csikszentmihalyi, M., Abuhamdeh, S., & Nakamura, J. (2014). Flow. In Flow and the foundations of positive psychology: The collected works of Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi 
(pp. 227 – 238). Netherlands: Springer. Dordrecht .
Dao, P. (2020). Effect of interaction strategy instruction on learner engagement in peer interaction. System, 91 , Article 102244. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
system.2020.102244
Dawes, J. (2008). Do data characteristics change according to the number of scale points used? An experiment using 5-point, 7-point and 10-point scales. International 
Journal of Market Research, 50 (1), 61 – 104. https://doi.org/10.1177/147078530805000106
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2012). Self-determination theory. Handbook of Theories of Social Psychology, 1 (20), 416 – 436. https://www.torrossa.com/en/resources/an/ 
5017496#page = 437 .
Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2013). Intrinsic motivation and self-determination in human behavior . Springer Science & Business Media . 
Deng, R., Benckendorff, P., & Gannaway, D. (2020). Learner engagement in MOOCs: Scale development and validation. British Journal of Educational Technology, 51 
(1), 245 – 262. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12810
Deng, Q., Fu, C., Ban, M., & Iio, T. (2024). A systematic review on robot-assisted language learning for adults. Frontiers in Psychology, 15 , 1471370. https://doi.org/10. 
3389/fpsyg.2024.1471370 .
Derakhshan, A., Teo, T., & Khazaie, S. (2025). Investigating the usefulness of artificial intelligence-driven robots in developing empathy for English for medical 
purposes communication: The role-play of Asian and African students. Computers in Human Behavior, 162 . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2024.108416
Derakhshan, A., Teo, T., Saeedy Robat, E., Janebi Enayat, M., & Jahanbakhsh, A. A. (2024). Robot-assisted language learning: A meta-analysis. Review of Educational 
Research . , Article 00346543241247227. https://doi.org/10.3102/00346543241247227
Ding, Y., & Zhu, J. (2025). Mobile based peer feedback in EFL speaking: Learners' motivation, behavioral engagement in feedback provision, and achievement. Asian- 
Pacific Journal of Second and Foreign Language Education, 10 (1), 10.10.1186/s40862-024-00314-9 .
D ¨ornyei, Z. (2014). The psychology of the language learner: Individual differences in second language acquisition . Routledge . 
Ellis, N. C. (2019). Essentials of a theory of language cognition. The Modern Language Journal, 103 , 39 – 60. https://doi.org/10.1111/modl.12532
Engestr ¨om, Y. (2001a). Making expansive decisions: An activity-theoretical study of practitioners building collaborative medical care for children. In Decision making: 
Social and creative dimensions (pp. 281 – 301). Dordrecht: Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-94-015-9827-9_14 . 
Engestr ¨om, Y. (2001b). Expansive learning at work: Toward an activity theoretical reconceptualisation. Journal of Education and Work, 14 (1), 133 – 156. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/13639080020028747
Field, A. (2018). Discovering statistics using IBM SPSS statistics (5
th 
ed . London: SAGE Publications Ltd . 
Finn, A. N., & Schrodt, P. (2012). Students' perceived understanding mediates the effects of teacher clarity and nonverbal immediacy on learner empowerment. 
Communication Education, 61 (2), 111 – 130. https://doi.org/10.1080/03634523.2012.656669
Gan, Z., Yan, Z., & An, Z. (2022). Development and validation of an EFL speaking self-efficacy scale in the self-regulated learning context. Journal of Asia TEFL, 19 (1), 
35. https://doi.org/10.18823/asiatefl.2022.19.1.3.35
Ghani, M. T. A., Hamzah, M., Ramli, S., Ab, W., Daud, A. W., Romli, T. R. M., & Mokhtar, N. N. M. (2019). A questionnaire-based approach on technology acceptance 
model for mobile digital game-based learning. Journal of Global Business and Social Entrepreneurship (GBSE), 5 (14), 11 – 21. http://www.gbse.my/V5%20NO.14% 
20(MARCH%202019)/Paper-199-.pdf .
Gibbes, M., & Carson, L. (2014). Project-based language learning: An activity theory analysis. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 8 (2), 171 – 189. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/17501229.2013.793689
Gobert, J. D., Baker, R. S., & Wixon, M. B. (2015). Operationalising and detecting disengagement within online science microworlds. Educational Psychologist, 50 (1), 
43 – 57. https://doi.org/10.1080/00461520.2014.999919
Gomez, Y. C. (2021). How do Japanese EFL learners fail to engage in a Collaborative Dialogue in a Group Project? International Journal of Curriculum Development and 
Practice, 24 (1), 31 – 45. https://doi.org/10.18993/jcrdaen.24.1_31
Greene, R. R. (2017). Carl Rogers and the person-centered approach. In Human behavior theory and social work practice (pp. 113 – 132). Routledge . 
Gumbaridze, J. (2013). Error correction in EFL speaking classrooms. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 70 , 1660 – 1663. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
sbspro.2013.01.237
Hair Jr, J. F., Hult, G. T. M., Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., Danks, N. P., & Ray, S. (2021). Partial least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM) using R: A workbook . 
Springer Nature . 
Harmer, J. (2007). The practice of English language teaching (4
th 
ed . Pearson Education Limited . 
Heemskerk, C. H. H. M., & Malmberg, L. (2020). Students' observed engagement in lessons, instructional activities, andlearning experiences. Frontline Learning 
Research, 8 (6). https://doi.org/10.14786/flr.v8i6.613 , 38, 58.
Higa, C. K., Phillips, L. K., Chorpita, B. F., & Daleiden, E. L. (2008). The structure of self-consciousness in children and young adolescents and relations to social 
anxiety. Journal of Psychopathology and Behavioral Assessment, 30 , 261 – 271. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10862-008-9079-z
Hiver, P., Al-Hoorie, A. H., & Mercer, S. (2020). Student engagement in the Language classroom. Multilingual Matters . https://doi.org/10.21832/9781788923613
Hong, H. S. (2016). The effects of listening comprehension on ESL learners' English language proficiency. Malaysian Journal of ELT Research, 12 (2), 15 – 30 .
Horwitz, E. K. (1999). Cultural and situational influences on foreign language learners' beliefs about language learning: A review of BALLI studies. System, 27 (4), 
557 – 576. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0346-251X(99)00050-0
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
28 
Hsieh, Y. H., Lin, Y. C., & Hou, H. T. (2015). Exploring elementary-school students' engagement patterns in a game-based learning environment. Journal of Educational 
Technology & Society, 18 (2), 336 – 348. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/jeductechsoci.18.2.336 .
Hu, L., & Wang, Y. (2023). The predicting role of EFL teachers' immediacy behaviors in students' willingness to communicate and academic engagement. BMC 
Psychology, 11 (1), 318. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40359-023-01378-x
In, J., & Han, J. (2015). The acoustic-phonetics change of English learners in robot assisted learning. In Proceedings of the tenth annual ACM/IEEE international 
conference on human-robot interaction extended abstracts (pp. 39 – 40). https://doi.org/10.1145/2701973.2702003
Jusslin, S., Korpinen, K., Lilja, N., Martin, R., Lehtinen-Schnabel, J., & Anttila, E. (2022). Embodied learning and teaching approaches in language education: A mixed 
studies review. Educational Research Review, 37 , Article 100480. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2022.100480
Ke, F., Xie, K., & Xie, Y. (2016). Game-based learning engagement: A theory-and data-driven exploration. British Journal of Educational Technology, 47 (6), 1183 – 1201. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12314
Khan, R. M. I., Radzuan, N. R. M., Farooqi, S. U. H., Shahbaz, M., & Khan, M. S. (2021). Learners' perceptions on WhatsApp integration as a learning tool to develop 
EFL vocabulary for speaking skill. International Journal of Language Education, 5 (2), 1 – 14. https://eric.ed.gov/?id = EJ1313267 .
Khazaie, S., & Derakhshan, A. (2024). Extending embodied cognition through robot's augmented reality in English for medical purposes classrooms. English for Specific 
Purposes . https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2024.03.001
Khazaie, S., Derakhshan, A., & Karbasi, M. (2025). Exploring the potentials of the telepresence robot-assisted medical college Persian productive skills education 
among Middle Eastern students. In H. Saeli (Ed.), Handbook of teaching and learning Persian as a second language . Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-97- 
1818-4_33-1 . 
Klassen, R. M. (2006). Too much confidence. In F. Pajares, & T. Urdan (Eds.), Self-efficacy beliefs of adolescents (pp. 181 – 200). Greenwich, Conn .
Lee, H., & Lee, J. H. (2022). The effects of robot-assisted language learning: A meta-analysis. Educational Research Review, 35 , Article 100425. https://doi.org/ 
10.1016/j.edurev.2021.100425
Lee, S., Noh, H., Lee, J., Lee, K., Lee, G. G., Sagong, S., & Kim, M. (2011). On the effectiveness of robot-assisted language learning. ReCALL, 23 (1), 25 – 58. https://doi. 
org/10.1017/S0958344010000273
Li, X., & Jia, X. (2006). Why don't you speak up?: East Asian students' participation patterns in American and Chinese ESL classrooms. Intercultural Communication 
Studies, 15 (1), 192 – 206. https://media.sciltp.com/articles/sciltp/ics/2006/19-Xiaoshi-Li-Xuerui-Jia.pdf .
Li, R., Meng, Z., Tian, M., Zhang, Z., & Xiao, W. (2021). Modelling Chinese EFL learners' flow experiences in digital game-based vocabulary learning: The roles of 
learner and contextual factors. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 34 (4), 483 – 505. https://doi.org/10.1080/09588221.2019.1619585
Lin, V., Yeh, H. C., & Chen, N. S. (2022). A systematic review on oral interactions in robot-assisted language learning. Electronics, 11 (2), 290. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
electronics11020290
Mahripah, S. (2013). EFL learners' affection in the improvement of their English performance. LITERA, 12 (2), 287 – 299 .
Meade, A. W., & Craig, S. B. (2012). Identifying careless responses in survey data. Psychological Methods, 17 (3), 437 – 455. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0028085
Mirahmadi, S. H., & Alavi, S. M. (2016). The role of traditional and virtual scaffolding in developing speaking ability of Iranian EFL learners. International Journal of 
English Linguistics, 6 (2), 43 – 56. https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/b54a/1ad3b600eab6c8be4323df3cc042385d3019.pdf .
Nagle, C. (2021). Using Expectancy Value Theory to understand motivation, persistence, and achievement in university-level foreign language learning. Foreign 
Language Annals, 54 (4), 1238 – 1256. https://doi.org/10.1111/flan.12569
Nunan, D. (2015). Teaching English to speakers of other languages: An introduction . Routledge . 
Peng, J., & Woodrow, L. (2010). Willingness to communicate in English: A model in the Chinese EFL classroom context. Language Learning, 60 (4), 834 – 876 .
Perttula, A., Kiili, K., Lindstedt, A., & Tuomi, P. (2017). Flow experience in game-based learning – a systematic literature review. International Journal of Serious Games, 
4 (1), 57 – 72. https://doi.org/10.17083/ijsg.v4i1.151
Philp, J., & Duchesne, S. (2016). Exploring engagement in tasks in the language classroom. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 36 , 50 – 72. https://doi.org/10.1017/ 
S0267190515000094
Philp, J., Walter, S., & Basturkmen, H. (2010). Peer interaction in the foreign language classroom: What factors foster a focus on form? Language Awareness, 19 (4), 
261 – 279. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658416.2010.516831
Plass, J. L., Homer, B. D., & Kinzer, C. K. (2015). Foundations of game-based learning. Educational Psychologist, 50 (4), 258 – 283. https://doi.org/10.1080/ 
00461520.2015.1122533
Pruss, E. T. H. E. L. (2022). The effect of embodiment on adaptive robot assisted language learning . Netherlands: Tilburg University. Bachelor Thesis http://arno.uvt.nl/ 
show.cgi?fid = 161984 .
Randall, N. (2019). A survey of robot-assisted language learning (RALL). ACM Transactions on Human-Robot Interaction (THRI), 9 (1), 1 – 36. https://doi.org/10.1145/ 
3345506
Rastelli, S. (2018). Neurolinguistics and second language teaching: A view from the crossroads. Second Language Research, 34 (1), 103 – 123. https://doi.org/10.1177/ 
0267658316681377
Reeve, J. (2013). How students create motivationally supportive learning environments for themselves: The concept of agentic engagement. Journal of Educational 
Psychology, 105 (3), 579 – 595. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0032690
Riazi, A. M., & Farsani, M. A. (2023). Mixed-methods research in applied linguistics: Charting the progress through the second decade of the twenty-first century. 
Language Teaching , 1 – 40. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0261444823000332
Schiavo, F., Campitiello, L., Todino, M. D., & Di Tore, P. A. (2024). Educational robots, emotion recognition and ASD: New horizon in special education. Education 
Sciences, 14 (3), 258. https://doi.org/10.3390/educsci14030258
Schmidt, R. (2012). Attention, awareness, and individual differences in language learning. Perspectives on Individual Characteristics and Foreign Language Education, 6 
(27), 27 – 49. https://doi.org/10.1515/9781614510932
Sheen, Y. (2008). Recasts, language anxiety, modified output, and L2 learning. Language Learning, 58 (4), 835 – 874. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-9922.2008.00480. 
x
Shenton, A. K. (2004). Strategies for ensuring trustworthiness in qualitative research projects. Education for Information, 22 (2), 63 – 75. https://doi.org/10.3233/EFI- 
2004-22201
Shin, J. E., & Shin, D. H. (2015). Robot as a facilitator in language conversation class. In Proceedings of the tenth annual ACM/IEEE international conference on human- 
robot interaction extended abstracts (pp. 11 – 12). https://doi.org/10.1145/2701973.2702062
Skinner, E. A., Kindermann, T. A., & Furrer, C. J. (2009). A motivational perspective on engagement and disaffection: Conceptualization and assessment of children ’ s 
behavioral and emotional participation in academic activities in the classroom. Educational and psychological measurement, 69 (3), 493 – 525. https://doi.org/10. 
1177/0013164408323233 .
Suban, T. S. (2021). Teaching speaking: Activities to promote speaking skills in EFL classrooms. Lectio: Journal of Language and Language Teaching, 1 (1), 41 – 50. 
https://www.journal.unwira.ac.id/index.php/LECTIO/article/view/888 .
Svalberg, A. M. L. (2009). Engagement with language: Interrogating a construct. Language Awareness, 18 , 242 – 258. https://doi.org/10.1080/09658410903197264
Symeonidis, V., Guberman, A., & Cooper, R. (2025). Addressing teacher shortages in an international context: Implications for the quality and status of teacher 
education. European Journal of Teacher Education, 48 (1), 1 – 8. https://doi.org/10.1080/02619768.2025.2447968
Valagkouti, I. A., Troussas, C., Krouska, A., Feidakis, M., & Sgouropoulou, C. (2022). Emotion recognition in human – robot interaction using the NAO robot. Computers, 
11 (5), 72. https://doi.org/10.3390/computers11050072
van den Berghe, R., Verhagen, J., Oudgenoeg-Paz, O., van der Ven, S., & Leseman, P. (2019). Social robots for language learning: A review. Review of Educational 
Research, 89 (2), 259 – 295. https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654318821286
Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). In M. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman (Eds.), Mind in Society: The development of higher psychological processes . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press . 
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
29 
Wang, L., & Wu, X. (2020). Influence of affective factors on learning ability in second language acquisition. Revista Argentina de Clinica Psicologica, 29(2), 1232. 
https://doi.org/10.24205/03276716.2020.365
Wang, Y. H., Young, S. S. C., & Jang, J. S. R. (2013). Using tangible companions for enhancing learning English conversation. Journal of Educational Technology & 
Society, 16(2), 296–309. https://www.jstor.org/stable/10.2307/jeductechsoci.16.2.296 .
Wesely, P. M. (2012). Learner affection, perceptions, and beliefs in language learning. Foreign Language Annals, 45(s1), s98–s117. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1944- 
9720.2012.01181.x
Wigfield, A., & Eccles, J. S. (2000). Expectancy–value theory of achievement motivation. Contemporary Educational Psychology, 25(1), 68–81. https://doi.org/ 
10.1006/ceps.1999.1015
Wu, X., & Li, R. (2024). Effects of robot-assisted language learning on English-as-a-foreign-language skill development. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 62 
(4), 1010–1034. https://doi.org/10.1177/07356331231226171
Yorita, A., Botzheim, J., & Kubota, N. (2013). Self-efficacy using fuzzy control for long-term communication in robot-assisted language learning. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ 
international conference on intelligent robots and systems (pp. 5708–5715). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2013.6697183. 
Zeinivand, T., Azizifar, A., & Gowhary, H. (2015). The relationship between attitude and speaking proficiency of Iranian EFL learners: The case of Darrehshehr city. 
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 199, 240–247. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2015.07.512
Zhang, X., Dai, S., & Ardasheva, Y. (2020). Contributions of (de) motivation, engagement, and anxiety to English listening and speaking. Learning and Individual 
Differences, 79, Article 101856. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2020.101856
Zhang, R., & Zou, D. (2023). A review of research on technology-enhanced peer feedback for second language writing based on the activity theory framework. 
Education and Information Technologies, 28(6), 6727–6753. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-022-11469-8
Zhang, R., Zou, D., & Cheng, G. (2024). Technology-enhanced language learning with null and negative results since 2000: A systematic review based on the activity 
theory. Education and Information Technologies, 29(4), 5017–5077. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-023-11993-1
Zhang, R., Zou, D., & Cheng, G. (2026). Non-academic learner socialisation with ChatGPT and its influences on learning English argumentative writing logic. 
Education and Information Technologies, 31(1), 99–142. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-025-13776-2 .
Zhang, R., Zou, D., Xie, H., & Wang, F. L. (2025b). Engagements with GPT responses and learner prompts in ChatGPT-based learning of English argumentative writing 
logic and their impacts. Computers and Education: Artificial Intelligence, 100489. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2025.100489 .
Zhao, M., Gong, L., & Din, A. S. (2025). A review of the emotion recognition model of robots. Applied Intelligence, 55(6), 364. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-025- 
06245-3
Zheng, Y. (2021). The comparison in polite Language between Western culture and Chinese culture. In 2021 7th annual international conference on network and 
information systems for computers (ICNISC) (pp. 532–535). IEEE. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICNISC54316.2021.00101. 
Zhang, R., Zou, D., Cheng, G., & Xie, H. (2025a). Flow in ChatGPT-based logic learning and its influences on logic and self-efficacy in English argumentative writing. 
Computers in Human Behavior, 162, Article 108457. 10.1016/j.chb.2024.108457.
Ruofei Zhang is a lecturer of Centre for English and Additional Languages at Lingnan University. Her research interests include educational technology, chatbot-based 
language learning, game-based language learning, self-regulated language learning, and artificial intelligence in language education. She has published around 40 
research papers in international journals, conferences and books, including Computer Assisted Language Learning, and Computers in Human Behavior, and System.
Di Zou is an Associate Professor of Department of English and Communication at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. Her research interests include second language 
acquisition, educational technology, and artificial intelligence in language education. She has led and collaborated on more than 20 research projects that explore the 
pedagogical potential of digital tools in language classrooms. She has published around 200 research papers in international journals, conferences and books, including 
Computers & Education, Computer Assisted Language Learning, and Computers in Human Behavior. She has obtained the World's Top 2% Scientists by Stanford University.
Prof. Haoran Xie received a Ph.D. degree in Computer Science from City University of Hong Kong and an Ed.D degree in Digital Learning from the University of Bristol. 
He is currently a Professor and the Person-in-Charge at the Division of Artificial Intelligence, Director of LEO Dr David P. Chan Institute of Data Science, and the 
Associate Dean of the School of Data Science, Lingnan University, Hong Kong. He is the Editor-in-Chief of Natural Language Processing Journal, Computers & Education: 
X Reality, Computers & Education: Artificial Intelligence, and Artificial Intelligence in Language Education; and the Co-Editor-in-Chief of Knowledge Management & E- 
Learning. His research interests include natural language processing, large language models, language learning, and AI in education. He has published around 500 
research publications, including more than 300 journal articles. His Google Scholar citation is more than 32,000 with the h-index of 70 and i10-index of 258. He has 
obtained 30 research awards including the World's Top 2% Scientists by Stanford University, Top 0.5% Highly Ranked Scholar, and Best Computer Science Scientists.
Gary Cheng is the Director of the Centre for Learning, Teaching and Technology and an Associate Professor of the Department of Mathematics and Information 
Technology at The Education University of Hong Kong. He has been involved in research projects funded by EdUHK and the Research Grant Council of Hong Kong on a 
range of topics mainly related to technology enhanced learning. His research interests include Artificial Intelligence in Education, Learning Analytics, Information 
Technology Supported L2 Learning, ePortfolio-mediated Learning, Computer Programming Education, Online Learning Management System, and e-Assessment.
R. Zhang et al.                                                                                                                                                                                                          Computers & Education 251 (2026) 105635 
30 